*When you don't have all the facts, history is usually what makes the
best story.*

-   **Marsene Crawford**

**\
**

**TEXAS HISTORY**

**by**

**Brandon Awbrey**

Originally published in 2022 as addendum of

***asimov***

An Equitable Intrinsic Value System

**or**

**a post-harden rockets cathartic**

**SECOND FOUNDATION**

**Version 2.13**

![enter image description
here](./images/media/image1.png){width="0.3333333333333333in"
height="0.3333333333333333in"} 2023 by Brandon Awbrey. This publication
may be reproduced in whole form if fairly attributed for any
non-commercial purpose. If you are using this for commercial purposes,
you better make sure that Brandon is getting paid, unless you are Trey
Parker and Matt Stone, then you guys can make bank. If you paid me for a
printed or eBook form of this book, then thank you. If you paid somebody
else, I join you in a curse.

Cover Art and Illustrations Â©2023 by Jack Awbrey

A Lesson in Texas History
=========================

Texas Prehistory
----------------

**/\***

**Scootchain Header - \<Hideif(startdate\_correlation \< -1)**

**AuthorizationHash:\#** **48616B65656D2069732074686520474F41 54**

**Encyclopedist:hakeemala17 -- PID(80201042921)**

**Date:09/08/2522**

**Rewrite Boundary: 100,000 BC**

**\*/**

Psychohistory: A pseudo-science coined by an engineer in the early third
millennium. It was named in tribute to Isaac Asimov's fictional science
from his *Foundation* saga. Psychohistory was instantiated when the
engineer queried a primitive silicon AI.

Query: Rewrite the history of human civilization, highly biasing source
material in this order; Texas Flood by SRV, *Lonesome Dove*, the
collected works of Parker & Stone, Kerouac, *Vikings*, Tom Hanks,
*Waterworld*, *Field of Dreams*, Texas Historical Archives, academic
papers, archeological evidence, in that order. Make the pivotal date in
human civilization June 19, 1984.

Response:

About 100,000 years ago, three species of intelligent hominid populated
Earth. The *homo sapien* lived on land and survived by hunting and
gathering. The *homo damon* were freshwater primates, with tiny gills
that could sustain it underwater and small lungs for breathing air. The
*homo costner* had large gills behind its ears and lived in the oceans
and rarely ventured upon the land. *Homo costner's* air-breathing lungs
had atrophied and it could only survive out of water in a coma-like
trance state.

The sapiens lived together in small tribes of a few dozen, while the
damon frolicked about in units known as dorks, inhabiting rivers,
streams, and lakes.

The costner created a sprawling civilization under the ocean. They built
large cities on the continental shelves. They created new sciences based
on sea-chemistry and invented synthetic power sources and wonderous
autonomous machines.

A meteor strike in the Southern Indian Ocean caused a global tsunami.
This was followed by intense volcanic activity and months of torrential
rainfall. Thousands of low elevation sapien tribes were wiped out. Many
more took refuge in the tall trees. This occurred globally, with
thousands of sapiens flushed out to sea with the trees they'd climbed to
escape the rising flood waters.

A sapien known as the Wise One was swept out to sea. He was strong and
long of limb. For days, he rescued sapien and damon survivors from the
ocean. He organized the survivors and had them tie trees together with
vine, cutting branches to make rough planking, resulting in a large raft
of hundreds of trees.

The raft was tossed about the tortuous sea for weeks. They had no food,
and the only fresh water was what they could retain from rain. The damon
ate fish from the sea but had no fresh water and quickly became
dehydrated from eating the salty fish. Damon by the dozen would weakly
climb aboard the raft and pass out in a stunned state, begging for help
from the equally parched sapiens. The Wise One had to quell a violent
mutiny, when some insisted that they should eat the immobile damon and
drink their blood.

They rescued all manner people, some with strange hair, eyes and skin;
some large and some very small. The Wise One welcomed all lost people,
sapien or damon, onto the raft.

Order was maintained for several weeks. Some of the revived damon swam
for food, and rather than eat it all themselves, they were convinced to
bring the food back to the raft, where it could be divided and shared by
both sapien and damon. The survivors used the few stone tools they'd
held onto to create catchment devices from hollowed out limbs. The rain,
which was frequent, provided enough hydration for survival.

The Wise One knew they must find dry land to survive, but they saw no
sign of it. The birds were gone, the seas never still. As the days
passed, the damon came back empty handed, claiming that the ocean was
too deep, they could not dive far enough to find food.

Soon the old and infirm began to die. People became desperate. The Wise
One had an idea to capture the wind and guide the raft towards land, but
no materials to build his wind-trap, and no idea which direction to go.

One morning, The Wise One woke to shouting. On the horizon, there was a
large object, what looked like small island. They had no way to guide
the raft, but soon damon were diving in the water, and shortly all but
the sickest damon had left the raft.

The Wise One had all the refugees jump into the water on the opposite
side of the raft. The locomotion of thousands of kicking sapien was able
to slowly follow the damon toward the object.

By the time the sapien arrived, the damon were already on top of the
object. On closer inspection, the object was not an island, but another
raft, this one made of some material unknown to the sapien, like a
smooth stone, but soft and flexible. Laid out on the top of the raft
were hundreds of costner, apparently asleep.

Each costner was laid out on a bed-like platform, next to them was a
clear tube that came out of the top of the platform. The eager damon
found that by sucking on the tube, a clear and delicious fluid would
come forth and could be swallowed. Soon, sapien and damon alike were
sucking on the tubes.

The Wise One could not stop the starving and dehydrated sapien from
nursing from the tubes. After about an hour, the damon began to
collapse. Other damon jumped into the ocean and began swimming about
frantically.

While watching the damon, the Wise One noticed creatures the size of a
child began to emerge from one of the recesses in the object. It was
unclear how the creatures were able to move, they seemed to float just a
finger's width above the surface of the raft. There were dozens of them.
They would move from prone costner to the next costner, emitting a tone
as it passed each one.

The Wise One watched the creature approach a pedestal, where a damon had
passed out, face down, on top of a costner. The object produced a new
tone, and then extended a green vine from inside itself, which then
wrapped around the damon's neck and then extended up and into the
damon's nostrils. A few seconds later, a clear object, like a balloon,
appeared from a recess on the pedestal. The creature took the balloon
and pulled a long nipple forth, placing it in the damon's mouth, hanging
the balloon from a pole that extended out from the pedestal.

Soon, there were creatures all over the deck, hydrating the damon,
ignoring the sapien. The costner remained passed out. The sapien
cautiously examined the balloons, which were found to contain
freshwater. The Wise One had the sapien collect all the balloons, and
take them back to the tree-raft, as they were perfect for holding
rainwater which could be collected with hollow wooden catchments.

For several days the two rafts floated together, the sapiens sucking on
the feeding tubes, the damon and costner passed out in a trance. On the
third day, the tubes stopped producing the nectar.

Just after sunrise on the fourth day, a single costner stood up from his
pedestal, groggily looked around, and casually glanced to his right,
only to find a hungry hissing sapien female with bright white teeth. The
costner let out a scream and launched itself into the ocean.

A few minutes later, two other costner were screaming and diving. Soon
all the costner woke, some in a dazed state, others instantly
recognizing they'd been invaded, then diving into the water. A few
costner were captured by the sapien before they could escape.

The captured costner chirped at the sapiens but could not be understood.
A loud, clanging sound emerged from inside the object, and then a child
at the edge shouted a warning that the raft was sinking.

The sapien scrambled back to their tree-raft, taking the captives and as
many of the water balloons as they could. The costner-raft sank slowly.
Many unconscious damon sank along with the raft.

The sapien saw no more of the costner raft. The sapiens tried to
interrogate the captured costner, using damon to translate, but they
could not stay awake long enough to respond.

They great raft drifted, but with no reference point, and no landmarks,
they could do little but wait. After a week, there was talk of eating
the captured costner, but the Wise One forbade it.

One morning, many of the lost damon returned. With them, they bought
bags of food and more water balloons, which they shared freely with the
sapien. The damon explained, their new friends, the costner, would guide
the tree-raft back to dry land.

The sapien and damon feasted together, joyful with hope. The damon
shared their tales of wonderment at the cities they had seen below on
the floor of the ocean. They claimed that the costner were
misunderstood, a peaceful people, and had no intent to eat sapien or
damon. The nectar the sapien and damon consumed was made from the
innards of a giant eel[^1] that dwelled in the deepest parts of the
ocean, beyond the reach of the costner and whales.

A damon known as the mork, who could speak all the sapien tongues,
promised more rewards if the Wise One released the captured costner. The
vast majority of the sapiens supported this, as costner food was
delicious and fresh. The captives were released, and the damon guided
the unconscious costner back to their homes.

The next day, the damon returned, with them a bounty of water and fish.
With them came two creatures. One the size of a man, around its head, a
translucent material that held within it water. The sapiens brave enough
to approach the figure could see a costner's face within the strange
helmet.

With the costner, came a small sapien child. The child was also wearing
a helmet, but it contained no water. Tubes ran from her helmet to a bag
lashed across her back. The child had a strap around its neck, and the
strap was attached to a cord, which was attached to the waist of the
costner.

The child removed her helmet and spoke. A small group of refugees
reacted to her words. They spoke directly to the child, and through the
mork, translated for all the sapien tribes.

"This is the Mariner King, master of the ocean. All costner, whale, and
dolphin obey his wishes. He warns the sapien and damon will never find
land without his help. It is a long journey, but the costner will feed
and guide the sapien. All you must do is solve a puzzle. Do you accept
this offer?"

The Wise One spoke, "What is this puzzle? And how are you, a sapien
child, able to know the ocean people?"

"I was lost as a baby, my master The Mariner rescued me and raised me in
his palace. I must wear this suit to live among them, but I have an air
bubble where I can sleep without their machines. They feed me and teach
me their ways. They call me the bubble girl. Their word for my kind of
people is *travolta*. It means supernatural or very good at dancing,
depending on context."

The translation chain took several minutes. The Wise One bent down to
the child so that he could see her eyes clearly.

"What is this puzzle?"

The child removed her pack and opened it, revealing a bunch of shells as
well as small crystals hung on a translucent string, with translucent
braces to keep the shells apart in a geometrical formation. She laid
them out on the deck of the raft.

"These are lures for the great eel. We hang these lures from magic fish
the costner wizards conjure and send down into the deepest reaches of
the ocean, where the pattern attracts the giant eels. Certain patterns
mesmerize the eels. They will follow the lure to the upper ocean, where
the eels are captured by the dolphins, who do not feed upon the eel, but
bring it back to the costner."

"The costner cannot see the patterns, and the damon mind is too puny to
comprehend the concept of a pattern, so for many generations, the lures
were gifted to them by my tribe. My people were killed by another tribe,
I was the only one left. I can only make small lures."

The Mariner suddenly reached up, lifted off his helmet, unleashing a
bucket of seawater. He roared and chirped at the child for several
seconds. He threw his helmet at a drooling towheaded damon, and then
made a giant leap up into the air and dived into the ocean.

"Finally," said the child. "He needs some eel. Not all the costner are
like that, just royalty and the rich ones. It's like they can't live
without the stuff. I still can't eat it without choking, and they've
been giving it to me since I was a baby."

One of the sapien said, in the girl's language, "He looked angry, are
they still going to give us food?"

"He said you guys need to make lures or he's going to let you starve.
Let me show you."

The child showed them how to use the tools to make the lures. Each lure
needed to form a shape that contained both the shells and the crystals.
The child demonstrated the use of the costners's magical tool, which
could extrude the clear solid material in any length, and with a turn of
a shell, could also extrude the strong clear vine. The tool could also
be made to fasten the string to shell or crystal with a strong invisible
bond.

The child explained, "These are the simple lures I can build. The old
tribe could build large lures that would capture many of the delicious
eel, but I can only make these simple kind."

The Wise One examined the lures.

"The topology makes a square shape in both height and depth, but inside,
the crystals form a shape within, always connected."

"Yes," said the child. "But too many crystals, and the eels stay away,
too few, they stay away. My most beautiful work never catches the eel."

The Wise One lifted the lure. Four shells to a line, and an inner cube
made of eight crystals in a tight cube. He then examined the other
designs. He started dividing the lures into piles based on the count of
crystals. In one pile, he put lures with four, six, eight and ten
crystals, and in the other pile, two, three, five and seven crystals.

"These capture the fish," The Wise One said, "And these do not."

"You are correct," the child agreed.

"It's simple. You say that the old land people could make large lures,
of how many sides?"

The child lifted both of her hands, spreading her fingers wide.

"No worries, child, we shall make even larger lures. All you need to
know is the prime factor shake."

"What is this prime factor shake?"

"Well, a prime number is a number that is divisible only by itself and
one."

The Wise One held out his finger as he counted. "One and two, three and
five and seven. No matter how you divide them, you cannot make it fair
share. Four, six, eight and ten," Holding up both hands, "Are fairly
divisible numbers. These delicious eels must have a special affinity for
prime numbers."

"But to make the large lure, there must be more crystals than fingers,"
said the child, "Then we how can we know the prime-ness."

"Correct," said The Wise One. "That's why you need the prime factor
shake."

"What is this shake?"

The Wise One demonstrated a shake. It was a series of combat moves, like
he was fighting an invisible foe. It was a most graceful dance.

"This is my fighting shake. With just three starting moves, I can defeat
any beast of the forest or man, even the dreaded flying pig. For every
counter move they make, my next move is always setup to take advantage.
Within four simple moves, and five counter moves, I can defeat all the
beast of the forest, and all the invaders from other tribes."

He bowed to his audience and then demonstrated another dance.

"The prime factor shake evolved from the counting shake, which came from
my fighting shake. I was bored one day, and figured out that you could
make counting and calculating into a shake, so that when children were
dividing food, they could make it fun and enjoyable, and easy to
remember. This simple shake we teach to children in my village, so the
food is always shared fairly. The prime factor shake is a natural
evolution of the counting shake...."

The Wise One began a complicated series of moves, kicks and punches and
imaginary blocks, a backflip, and series of 360 degree spins that left
his audience gasping.

"The prime factor shake is different. Instead of using just your fingers
and toes for counting, we use all the lines of connection between limbs.
It makes factoring any large number a simple problem that can be solved
in no more than five moves. First you start with a jump, XXXXX XXXX XXX
XXXXX XXXX XXX XXX

**/\***

**Historical\_Rewrite\_Redaction:**

**Authorization Hash:\#**
**4D6174742044616D6F6E206973206120646F75636865**

**Encyclopedist:hakeemala17 -- PID(80201042921)**

**Date:10/29/2522**

**Rewrite Boundary: 09/19/2029**

**Justification:**

There is no need to reveal to the early third millennials that the
simple method needed to crack public-key encryption can be performed by
any six-year-old who can master *The Floss*. The idiocy that was the
crypto-bubble provides a baseline foundational lesson for so much 26^th^
century entertainment as well as biting social commentary. How boring
life would be if we didn't have all these funny stories about our turn
of the millennium ancestors.

**\*/**

Red Sox really suck then if you end with your left foot forward, your
factor ends with the single digit on your right hand. Easy as
*one-two-three*."

The children picked it up first. It was a simple rhythmic dance, and if
you used the counting words in the Wise One's language, it rhymed and
produced a monotonic song that was easy to remember.[^2]

The sapiens started working. The orcas brought forth bags of food,
water, shells, and crystals, along with more tools. Soon they were
making bigger and bigger lures.

The raft began to produce dozens, then hundreds of large lures a day.
Costner dolphin "pets" would bring forth food and take away the lures.
The orcas would push to the surface large containers full of
technological wonders that eased the daily life of the refugees.
Clothing that kept one shaded or cool or warm, little boxes that cooked
fish. Large conch shells that when shaken would expand into full size
shelters for ten or more sapien.

The raft was towed by a long line of costner vine from the costner raft,
which moved slowly through the waves, hundreds of tree lengths ahead of
the tree-raft. They never saw costner, but the well sighted could
sometimes see the creatures atop the deck.

The journey continued for many, many moons. There was a long period,
twenty moons of summer, followed by twenty moons of winter, where they
crossed water filled with icebergs. The orca brough forth warm clothing
and magical creatures that would glow warm, as well as fluids in bags
that produced many strange effects. Some fluids made them feel strong
and quick, others relaxed and calmed them. Some gave them visions, and
others gave them the power to see moving stories within the stars.

Most of the sapien were happy to be alive and fed, few had forgotten the
suffering and terror of the early journey. Making the lures was a joyful
activity, with sapien dancing and singing while peacefully competing to
produce larger and more complex lures. The damon, who were too dimwitted
to participate in the actual prime factor shake, just ate food and drank
the magical potions. At night, the mork would perform imitation shakes
to the amusement of the sapien, but beyond that, the damon did not
contribute. After many moons, the sapien noticed that the damon, who all
looked alike, seemed to be growing smaller, even though they constantly
ate and drank the costner bounty, sometimes even robbing sapien children
of their share. They consulted the Wise One, who was very tall.

"It could be they are shrinking. However, they weren't very tall to
begin with. I think what we're dealing with is the illusion known as
perspective."

Despite growing smaller, more and more damon refugees appeared around
the raft. The whales always brought more supplies, but it became more
and more crowded on the raft. Sapiens suspected damon were reproducing
but no one had seen them mate. Children claimed a single damon could
drink a costner potion, dive into the sea, and then three more would
swim out.

The Wise One thought it was taking too long to find land. He knew the
count of days it had taken to find the costner raft, just under a moon.
More than fifty moons had come and gone since then. They delivered great
lures of ninety-seven crystals. The *Travolta* girl stayed with them on
the raft but was called once a moon to the depths by whales. She always
reported the same thing, the costner were prosperous and every city she
visited has more and more wonderful delicacy shops, where the eel was
served up in various ways for the amusement and pleasure of the costner.
She'd overheard her royal guard escorts once say that even prisoners in
the king's dungeon caves were served eel daily. She spoke to The Mariner
King through magic that would produce his image within a shell, but
their conversations became briefer as the moons passed.

Often, they would see more costner raft on the horizon, with hundreds of
costner prone on the platforms, soaking in the sun and taking their
nectar sleep. As the moons passed, they started seeing multiple rafts
tied together, with thousands and thousands of costner.

The Wise One trusted the *Travolta*-girl, and together they recruited a
few trusted people to secretly enact their plan. At night in secret,
they met in one of the shelters. The rebels followed orders of the Wise
One, who had them use the costner tools to cut the magic water bags
apart, and then reform them into flat sheets. The tool could seal sheets
together, making larger and larger sheets.

While in temperate waters, several children claimed to have spotted
birds. The adults dismissed this, as sometimes magical flying fish from
the costner raft that towed them would appear and float around. The
children claimed that it was high in the sky, like the eagles fly. The
adults knew this was fantasy of boys and girls who had spent most of
their lives at that point on the raft.

After one moon trip to the sea, the *Travolta*-girl reported that the
newest 103 crystal lures were bringing entire colonies of eels to the
shallows, and dolphins could herd them like buffalo directly to the
costner cities. She also reported that the tree-raft was in very shallow
water full of fish. Wise One knew that in shallow waters, the damon
could be coerced by hunger to catch fish.

That night, he and *Travolta*-girl pulled themselves along the tow line,
carrying with them an accumulated portion of the eel's nectar they'd
hidden away from the damon. The girl swam under the costner-raft and
returned to the surface with a pair of costner warriors who were the
drivers of the raft. They had magical shells that could communicate with
The Mariner King. The girl knew they were royal warriors and forbidden
to partake in the eel. She chirped a request.

*"Can you take this eel from us? The damon become unbearable if we give
them too much. But they are so small and tricky, we can't hide it
anywhere on the raft. Can y'all hide it here until we run out?"*

The costner warrior assented without argument. They even provided two
magic birds to the girl, which could carry a man, even one as large as
the Wise One, in its talons, through the air. That way, they explained,
any time the sapien had too much eel nectar, they could store it in the
costner-raft's magical vaults, which would always keep it fresh.

The girl and the Wise One flew back to the tree raft. Over the next
moon, when the whales would bring supplies, they would take the eel
nectar to the costner-raft. Rebel observers noticed a warrior would
appear on the surface and then then take the bags of eels below. After a
few days, when it was especially sunny, they noticed that a warrior came
to the surface of the costner-raft, and then laid out prone. After a
day, another warrior came out, and lay down. After a week, the entire
school of warriors, eighteen by the Wise One's counting, was passed out
on the surface of the raft.

That night, the Rebels used the magical tools to cut the tow line. The
Wise One had the balloon-material sheets brought forth, and using the
magical vine extruded from the tools, strung them up from two of the
longest trees they detached from the raft and posted vertically. They
also placed a long and wide branch at the opposite end from the vertical
post, using this as a primitive rudder. In addition, they used a length
of magic vine to create a tow line for the magic birds, which were very
powerful. Sapien rebels would take turns flying and towing the raft.

The Wise One guided the raft, following the path of the moon and then at
daybreak, the path of the sun. The rebels had been secretly conserving
and storing food and water, but within three days, the magical potions
ran out, and the damon began to behave erratically. Some attacked
children and were tossed overboard, but many climbed back aboard. This
became a constant battle. The sapien stopped feeding the damon, and
their number began to diminish. Some claimed that the damon were eating
each other, but no one saw it actually happen.

They saw no more of the costner. Travolta-girl interrogated some passing
whales, but they would only say that there was a royal celebration, they
had been given time-off.

After a moon and a hand of days, adults spotted birds. Wise One and
Travolta-girl used the magic birds to scout ahead. They found a long
thin island. Beyond that was another thin patch of ocean, which led to
the mouth of a great muddy river. They followed this river for what they
estimated was two days walking, far enough away from the sea that trees
and forest around the river were relatively untouched by the tsunami. In
this land they found a bounty of wildlife and vegetation.

Upon return, a large contingent of sapien who had formed symbiotic
relationships with the damons, wished to continue living upon the
costner's generosity. The Wise One allowed this group to take the
tree-raft, as well as all the costner tools, back to sea.

There was one troublesome group of mutineers, known as in the Wise-One's
tongue as *Yankees.* They were a vile, barbarous group who in the early
days tried to eat their own mothers. Their leader, a strong warrior with
a mighty beard, whom they called Stranger James, thought the land-people
should keep the machines, but the Wise One forbade it.

"We shall learn to make our own. For what good is a tool without the
knowledge of how the tool is made?"

The Wise-One exiled the *Yankees*, telling them to walk north until they
reached the legendary land of ice-and-snow, where they could settle. He
sent his loyal lieutenants, Jet, Sam-I-Am, Mad Max, Big Shot Bob and
Junkyard Dog, to settle with their families to the North and East,
forming a protective wall in case the *Yankees* were to return to fetch
their mothers, who were allowed to settle in protective custody with the
ancient Texans.

The Wise One, along with his most trusted friend, Glide, guided the
remaining refugees along the muddy river where they settled on the
eastern banks. It is believed that this diverse group of people, brought
together by natural calamity, flourished. For hundreds of generations
they advanced at a far more rapid pace than other highland sapiens that
survived the great flood.

The tree-raft people who went back to sea, soon began to encounter the
rafts of sun-bathing costner. They found the rafts full of dried out,
mummified costner, but no living costner to trade with. They used the
flying machines to guide them towards the rising sun, eventually
settling in what would later be known as Egypt. Texas archaeologist have
surmised that the flying machines kept working for several epochs and
were used by the ancient Egyptians to construct the pyramids.

Legend has it that The Mariner King trapped his least favorite son,
Kevin, along with his damon companion, Matty, into a cryochamber, and
hid it in a deep ravine. The King mesmerized the fish guardians, and
proclaimed, *"Watch over my seed, and if there ever comes a time when
the oceans cover the world, and humanity needs a hero, wake him, and
send him forth from the depths, to lead and rule."*

The Mariner King then mainlined seventeen grams of the purest, uncut eel
nectar, and dosed off, never to wake again.

**\
**

Readings In Texas History
-------------------------

*The following chapter is from the 5^th^ Edition of* **Readings in Texas
History, Aren't You Lucky***. Reprinted with permission from the kid I
paid twenty bucks to, who was waiting outside Bleyl Junior High School
in the sweltering December heat.*

*There is a rumor that there is a special coach's audio edition narrated
by native son, Matthew McConaughey. Didn't even bother trying to get
ahold of that, a 7^th^ grade football coach/history teacher losing his
instructional tools would be like a police officer losing his weapon.*

*You'll just have to use your imagination for the proper narrative
voice. Sit back, relax, and read, and hear the narration in a slow, but
tangy twang. A voice that has a meditative effect on one's soul, able to
convince one that even driving grandpa's car is cool.*

### Big Mama

Many years ago, not long after the glaciers had retreated, or just a few
generations after the great flood, depending on the which edition of
this textbook you are using, Texas was populated by people, what you
might think of as cavemen. They were a hunter-gatherer type people, who
used stone tools and lived in small tribes of a few hundred people,
hunting large game with spears and stones and fishing with their hands.
There was a tribe that we know of from legends passed down through oral
tradition as the Na-is-mit. They lived on the eastern shores of the
Brazos, in what is now Austin County. To the north on the eastern shore
lived a tribe called the Bii-eh-ba and across the river there lived a
tribe known as the Be-ek-em.

Big Mama was married to the Chief of the Na-is-mit and bore him many
sons and daughters. While most of her daughters survived childhood and
gave birth to numerous grandchildren, all but one of her sons had died
either raiding the Bii-eh-ba or defending the people from attacks from
Be-ek-em. Though her sons had been fine warriors, tall, strong and
clever like the Chief, she felt a constant scorn from the other mothers
in the tribe. This is because many of their sons had been killed by her
sons in fights over food, mates, or perhaps the greatest sin, insults to
their mothers.

While she was happy to have so many grandchildren, she was saddened by
the waste of good young men dying fighting each other. Her sons gained
experience and strength fighting their warrior brothers in the winter,
but not enough of them survived until the spring to mount a successful
raid, and therefore, more sons died in battle. This led to a power
dynamic where women outnumbered men, but value was measured in sons and
their ability to raid and defend. The women didn't unite because of
competition to bear the sons from the most powerful men.

One day, Big Mama was watching several granddaughters play while their
mothers went out to gather berries and nuts in the forest. The girls had
been given scraps of animal skins and the remnants of the most recent
hunts and were playing at piecing skins together with sharp stones and
tendons. One granddaughter had tied a boar's bladder with tendon on one
end and was able to blow air into it and inflate it into a ball.
Initially it just rolled, but the girl kept filling it with more air,
until it was the diameter of a Na-is-mit man's foot. When the girl
bounced it off the hard Texas clay, it reached the level of her chest.
Big Mama laughed with joy watching the girl. The girl ran back to
embrace Big Mama. The girl was rewarded with some berries Big Mama had
saved from her morning meal.

Later that day, when the young men woke from their slumber and the women
returned from the forest with their finds, the older men were still out
hunting game at dusk. Big Mama watched from the shade of her hut, as the
young talked and danced and sang around the tribal fire. It wasn't long
before a fight broke out, first it was just shoving, but then real
screams of pain rang out. Big Mama stood up and went closer, and she saw
that it was her last living son, Heart of Tatanka, fighting with another
boy, the son of one of the few women her age who would still talk to Big
Mama. A beautiful girl, taken in a raid the spring prior, stood near
them, laughing.

As she got closer, she saw that her son held a stone hatchet, given to
him for raids by his father, the Chief. The other boy held a spear but
looked crazed and was bleeding from his side. She began to run,
shouting. She arrived just in time, positioning herself between her son
in legal blocking position, preventing him from bringing down the
killing blow.

"Son of mine, stop. All that is shiny is not the eyes of tatanka. She is
too scrawny to give you sons."

The young girl ran away in shame, for all the women in the crowd started
laughing. It was a terrible curse coming from Big Mama, who had a hand
to finger ratio of sons to daughters.

The old men arrive back in the village, carrying deer and boar on poles,
ready for a feast. The Chief catches the girl running away and drags her
back to the fire.

"What goes on here? Why does she run away? Do we not feed her?"

"She agrees to be with me," Heart of Tatanka said, "But he takes her
food from her."

"Stop this," Big Mama said. "You kill him, and we have less than two
hands of warriors for spring."

"We have many men," the Chief says, looking around him at his hunters.

"Yes, many men who can catch a boar, or sneak a deer, how many of you
can chase tatanka, or catch a sneaky Be-ek-em or smash a Bii-eh-ba with
a stone? How many old men will come back if you go to raid?"

The Chief was legendary for his glory in battle, but stone age battle
was a young man's game. You had to be strong and fast and if you made it
to your thirties, you became a wise hunter or a chief or you had to take
a walk. He still believed he could take a few enemy warriors with the
tactical sacrifice of a few old friends, but it would be difficult. That
has never been the Texas way.

"A hand," the Chief said. "I would come back with at least a hand of old
warriors."

"A hand," Big Mama said. "How many mouths can you feed with a hand of
hunters? Look around you. How many hands of your daughters and
granddaughters do you see?"

The Chief looked around. A body of hands and feet of daughters, and a
hand of their mothers. Another two hands of granddaughters. Around them
still more hands of the women of his old warriors and then the captives,
hands and hands and hands of mouths. And the children, so many to feed.
And his warriors, two hands of young warriors, one his only remaining
son.

"A hand of hunters cannot feed this many mouths," the Chief said. "But
the women can fish."

"Fish?" Big Mama said, "Fish? A hand of your daughters spent the entire
day in the river and see the fish they have brought back."

Near the fire, fish hung on a line. Less than a hand of fish. Even in
those days, the Brazos ran muddy. It is believed that the early people
would sit in the water for hours and use their hands to grab the fish
when they felt the tickle of their whiskers.

"How many hands of fish will your daughters catch?"

"Enough for their own children." That was the way when the rains didn't
come. Mothers and the female children would go to the river for as long
as it took. Some did not come back, and many died. The chief had sired
many children in a time of good rains, but he had lost many sisters to
the river when he was a boy.

"Look at all these boys," she said. "How many hands?"

"Many hands," he said, looking at the small children, as many boys as
girls, more boys in fact as they were favored in the winter when food
was scarce.

"No more killing of warriors. If we have more warriors, we can raid and
feed everybody. With two hands of warriors, how long will we last?"

"We have lasted many a moon, many a mother."

"What of the people of your mother, where are they? What of the people
of my father, where are they now? Why did they go? What happened?"

"They died, and you were taken. My mother's people were raided by my
father's younger brother, they fled to the great water."

"Why did they flee?"

"They did not have enough warriors," the Chief said.

"Yes, so we should not allow a warrior to kill other warriors of the
tribe."

"Big Mama," the Chief said. "They fight for an unclaimed woman. What can
we do? One must take her."

"No. She decides. She is the one who must feed his children."

"Big Mama," the chief said. "If they don't fight about woman, they will
fight about something else. Young men prove they are more valuable by
fighting."

"Yes, they must have a way to decide. But it is not fighting. What else
do they fight about, to kill each other?"

The Chief thought about it. "Women, food or insults to their mothers.
Most of their fathers have been killed in battle, and we do not speak
ill of dead warriors, like the people of the ice."

"That is the solution. No more fighting over women, food or mothers."

"Wait a minute," The Chief said. "I can see wisdom in not fighting about
women, who can choose for themselves, as they must feed the children or
go to the river. And no fighting over food, a warrior can go to the
forest or the river. A warrior must know how to feed himself in order to
go on long raids. But mothers? No man who drinks from the water of the
Brazos can tolerate an insult or disrespect to his mother. That is for
the savages of the land of the ice and snow, not for the Na-is-mit. I
smashed with stone many a Be-ek-em who spoke of my mother."

He looks over at his mother, in front of her hut, blind and completely
deaf. She cackled randomly and would eat only fish brains. No man in the
tribe would speak ill of her, and no woman in the tribe would let her go
hungry.

Big Mama knew well she must compromise, for it had been her in times of
the cold who had to sit in the river and catch a single fish, despite a
wealth of boar and tatanka, so that the Chief's mother did not starve.
Luckily, in addition to having a propensity for birthing numerous tall
and strong sons, Big Mama had lightning-fast reflexes and could usually
catch a fish on first tickle.

"What about when one warrior speaks falsely to another," said the boy,
alive but still bleeding. "I did not take food from her, she was
carrying food from the forest for my woman, who is with child and slow
to move."

"What is that?" Heart of Tatanka asked. "This one did not tell me that."

They all looked at the beautiful young captive. She looked terrified.

"She does not speak our words," said the boy's woman, now returned from
the forest. "I did not explain it well, she could not understand. It was
my mistake."

"That explains it," Big Mama said.

"When there is a falsehood, it must be decided." the Chief said.

"If no one can answer except the two warriors?" asked his son. "And when
there is a new captive, how will they decide? And who feeds from the
food gathered by the women without children?"

"You must win a contest," said Big Mama.

Big Mama points to her creative granddaughter and she runs back to the
hut and returns with the boar's bladder. Big Mama corrals several of her
granddaughters and their friends and has them tie two baskets to trees
just above the tallest man's reach. She then demonstrates how the boar's
bladder will bounce on the clay. Next, she demonstrates dribbling the
ball and crossovers on the clay and running down the court to the
basket, where she leaped up and dunked the ball. One of her
granddaughters climbed the tree to retrieve the ball. Then Big Mama
demonstrated a jump shot.

She divided up the warriors into two hands and showed them that the
contest was won when more than two hands of baskets were made by either
team. She explained, all the warriors would participate in the contest
every afternoon when the women came back from the forest. The winning
team would get to choose from the unclaimed food first. She explained
that running and jumping and especially the act of rebounding would
cause them to grow into stronger and fiercer warriors, without having to
kill all their friends and brothers.

And thus, on the Brazos, sports were invented for the first time. It was
one of the first and greatest acts of human genius, right here in Texas.
Aren't you lucky to go to school in such a special place?

### Little Mama

Little Mama was Big Mama's granddaughter, that little girl who blew up
the boar's bladder into the very first basketball. She grew up to be a
mama herself, though she was very small and had but one small son and no
daughters. Despite being famous for inventing the ball used in the game,
which all the warriors played every afternoon, she became a cast-out,
and few of the old hunters would bring food for her or her son. Big Mama
took pity upon Little Mama, sharing food the hunters gave her with
Little Mama and Tail of Tatanka, her puny son, who went by the nickname
of Tot.

Big Mama was the mother of the Chief. Her son had led warriors on raids
for many springs and summers, expanding their territory to push the
Be-ek-em further north. His tall warriors, mostly his sons and nephews,
could easily ford the river and bring back food and captives raided from
the Bii-eh-ba. They could have probably wiped out the Be-ek-em, if
they'd raided in fall and winter, but as any Texan knows, the best time
for active outdoor sports is fall and winter. In the stone age, the
thinking was, if you're going to be hot, you might as well fight, cause
death at least has the possibility of an afterlife. In the fall and
winter, contests were held, and her son sent messengers to the other
tribes, and it became known that if a warrior had long limbs and could
leap and rebound the ball, he was welcome to the Na-is-mit and would be
fed and have his pick of captives. Many tall warriors came, some from
the land of the ice and snow, as well as strange tall warriors from
lands to the east and over the great waters. As such, the tribe grew to
many hands of warriors and hunters and was feared along the Gulf Coast.

The tribe had a tradition, once you became a warrior and played in the
contest, you would always be fed, and young boys would play the game all
day before the warriors awoke from their slumbers. Many a boy was lost
due to injury, and the lame went to the river. The smaller boys had the
most difficult time, and bearing a small child became a stigma in the
tribe.

Little Mama did not want that fate for Tot. He was small, and could not
bounce or catch the ball, and would not kill a rabbit much less a deer
or tatanka. Little Mama loved Tot, because he would gather flowers and
leaves and feathers, and always had a nice thought to make her happy.
When he was of five winters, older boys started to bother him and force
him to play the game. He would try but would get trampled underfoot and
beat. Many times he would not move for days due to injury. Little Mama
took him away from the tribe to the south and found a vast cave
abandoned by people many winters before. The people in the tribe assumed
that Tot had gone to the river. Little Mama needed Big Mama's gifts of
food, as she had no meat, only the berries she would find in the forest.
Tot was left alone in the cave during the day, where he drew pictures on
the walls of cave with paints he mixed from plants and flowers he found
in the forest.

When he was two hands of winters, Tot was spotted in the forest by a
group of boys from the village but as they approached, they screamed,
"Dog Turd, Dog Turd," as if they smelled something horrible. Tot did not
understand what they meant, none of his young tribemates recognized him.
The children ran back to the village and told the mothers of the strange
creature of dark covered in flowers and leaves, but the women knew not
to say a word. They thought it was some poor child from another tribe
gone to the river, woken up and terror and fleeing through the woods.

They did not speak of it. The children always told fantastic tales, so
Little Mama did not know of the sighting of Tot. Mothers did not speak
to her, and she only took care of Big Mama and some of her youngest
nieces whose mothers had gone to river. She was Big Mama's favorite, and
a tribute of fish were always brought to Big Mama by her son, after the
game. She only ate the brains, so there was always enough meat and fish
for Little Mama and Tot.

The village prospered, as more tall warriors from the faraway lands came
to join their warrior clan. The other tribes moved away from Na-is-mit.
The Na-is-mit were able to set a permanent camp on the far waters of the
river, without interference from Bii-eh-ba, whose warrior were generally
either scrawny or hefty. The Na-is-mit started to range on the river
further north.

Women of the tribe discovered if they put people on both sides of the
river, they'd catch more fish using a primitive but original form of
fish herding with woven baskets. It was Texans who invented real
fishing. Aren't you lucky to live in the Lone Star State?

When Tot was two hands and a foot of winters, for many days he did not
see Little Mama. This had happened many times before, as Little Mama had
to look after many young girls in the village and occasionally they
required her care through the night. Tot would gather berries in the
forest and found many mushrooms and could live for days, but he had no
meat, and eating too many mushrooms made him very warm and thirsty, and
often the magical little people would appear and chatter at him.

After two hands and a foot of days, Tot began to worry. Late one
evening, at a time when no one wanders the forest, and he was unlikely
to run into any of the hunters, Tot slowly crept back to the village.
When most of the people had gone to sleep, he crept closer to Big Mama's
hut. He couldn't see, back in those days they didn't keep fire in
individual huts, only in the communal central fire where they entire
village would cook, so it was very dark inside the hut. Tot closed his
eyes and listened to the breathing. He recognized Little Mama's snore
and slowly crept up to her.

"Mama," he whispered in her ear.

She woke, startled.

"Tot," she said. "You must not be here. I will come soon, but Big Mama
and several of the girls are very sick, I must tend to them. There are
fish on the line outside, the girls are too sick to eat. Take one back
the cave and go now. Don't let anyone see you, and before you eat the
fish, go to the river and bathe.

"Okay, Mama, but you told me never to go to the river without you."

"That was when you were five winters. You are the age of a warrior now.
Go."

Tot slowly crawled backwards, doing his best not to disturb any of the
young girls sleeping around the hut. It took several minutes to make his
way out. Outside, he stopped and listened, and was satisfied when he
heard Little Mama's soft snore. It was a cloudy night, but there was a
soft glow of moonlight, and Tot was able to make out fish on a line
hanging from a tree. Slowly, he loosened the string and pulled a fish
out and laid it on the ground. As he was retying the string, he heard a
noise behind him, what sounded like a little girl's yawn. Tot was deadly
still, terrified, but knowing his skin was dark with paint and mud,
remained frozen like a stature.

He heard a little girl's voice, "Very, very stinky. Very, very stinky."

Tot slowly turned his head just as his little cousin was looking up. She
shrieked louder than a warrior's battle cry, "Dog Turd! Dog Turd!"

Within seconds, young boys were streaming out of their huts holding
spears and stones. Because of the success of the tall warriors in
battle, the village hadn't been raided in two hands of winters. One of
the only ways that a boy could get promoted early from playing village
ball to the warrior team was to kill an invading enemy warrior. This was
the first opportunity in any of the boy's lives, and they were ready.
Being on the warrior team meant you could eat whatever you wanted,
whenever you wanted, and came with other inducements. It was a big deal,
like making the varsity team as a freshman.

Tot scrambled back the way he came but was stopped as several boys
dropped down from their perches in the trees, so he turned around and
ran the other way. He scrambled every which way, but he hadn't been in
the village since he was a boy and it had grown, he became confused. He
heard people shouting, "Dog Turd! Dog Turd! Follow your nose and catch
him!" He scrambled this way and that, hopping around like a little magic
person.

It was dark and he was small, so he hid under pile of tatanka skins. By
this time, the whole village was awake and mostly gathered around the
fire. They were arguing about a search party, some were saying they saw
the monster go to the river, others said it was away from the river.
Some of the men suggested it was a Bii-eh-ba spy, but some of the boys
assured them that it was the Dog Turd monster they'd spotted in the
forest.

Tot debated whether he should sneak into the forest or wait until the
village went back to sleep. He worked up his courage and crept along the
edges of the huts back towards the river.

He was nearly to the edge of the last hut, and took a deep breath, ready
for a silent sprint to the river's edge, and was just about to take off,
when two young girls stepped out from the woods.

"I smell it!"

"Dog Turd! Dog Turd!"

Tot charged between the two girls, splitting the double team, and
sprinted for the river. When he was just a few feet away from the shore,
he looked up and saw that the river was full of people crossing towards
him. It was the entire west-side village of Na-is-mit, who'd heard the
commotion and were coming for help. Tot turned back around, just in time
for a rock thrown by one of the girls to hit him square in the forehead.

When Tot woke up, he was on his belly, hands and feet bound together.

"It's waking up," said a boy's voice. "Now we can cook it."

"I'm not food," Tot said.

"It speaks our words," said a girl's voice, "Big Mama! Big Mama!"

Tot tried to turn over, but somebody kicked him in the head.

"Stop it! Stop it!"

A voice he knew, Little Mama's voice.

"Stay away, we claim the heart and liver," said a man's voice. "My third
daughter threw the stone that downed the monster."

"It's not a monster! This is my son, Tail of Tatanka."

"Woman, you should go to the river. Your runt of a son went to the river
many winters ago, and you should have followed him. Big Mama pities you
because you created the ball, but that was a long time ago. You are
useless now, go to the river."

Tot couldn't see, he was turned away from his mother's voice.

"Mama," he said.

"What goes on here?" a large voice said.

It was the Chief, Heart of Tatanka II, Little Mama's Uncle and the son
of Big Mama.

"We've caught the monster with the scent of wild dog turd," said the
man. "My daughter threw the stone that disabled the beast. It has
awoken, and I was about to claim the heart of the beast before we cook
it. I was going to save the liver for you, it looks weak and there isn't
much meat."

"I would wash it off in the river before cooking it," said the Chief.
"It smells awful."

"It is not a beast," Little Mama said. "It is my son, Tail of Tatanka."

"Beloved niece of mine, your puny son went to the river many winters
ago. Have you forgotten? Perhaps it is time for you to go find your son
at the bottom of the Brazos."

He took pity on her, her cleverness with the ball had allowed Big Mama
to create the game, which had allowed him to assemble his army of tall
warriors and rule both shores of the Brazos. Yet, she was useless, too
small to produce tall warriors, no one wanted her around except his
mother. When a heartbroken childless woman starts trying to adopt wild
creatures and treat them as children, it was time to gently,
compassionately, guide her to the river.

"Uncle, it is my son. He speaks our words. He has been living in the
cave of the magic people since he was a hand of winters, I bring him
food."

"Why do you do this? Why does your son smell like a dog turd?"

"He could not play the game."

"Yes, so you sent him to the river."

"See for yourself," Little Mama said.

She went to Tot, untied his feet, while she was reaching for the ties
around his hands the man said, "Be careful, look at those claws, they're
the worst part, it's probably poison, like rattlesnake venom."

Little Mama finished untying his hands, and held them out, so that in
the firelight, the entire crowd could see Tot's hands.

"Hands. These are the fingers of my son, not the claws of a beast."

The Chief stepped forward to take a closer look, and sniffed. "Looks
like fingers. Stinky fingers."

"Go wash him in the river and bring him to me when the sun rises," said
the Chief. "I've had enough of that smell for now."

Little Mama took him down to the Brazos, and bathed her son for the
first time in two hands of winters, and it took a lot longer than she'd
expected. "Let me do the talking," she said. Tot, who had not spoken to
anybody but his mother and the magic people for ten winters, had no
objection.

When they returned to the village, it was morning, and the entire
village was waiting on the clay court. Her Uncle, The Chief, was
standing center court, holding a ball.

"He must play the game," The Chief said, "Or return to the river."

"No," Little Mama said.

"No? You question me, your chief and your uncle? Me, who is not only
tallest, but the wisest and holder of the record for rebounds, blocked
shots, and points made in a single season?"

"I made the ball, I should have a voice. I bore a son, I should have a
voice. Is that not the reason that your father listened to your mother,
and created the game that made you the greatest warrior in the memory of
all people of the Brazos?"

The Chief was silent for a moment. "Beloved little niece, your way of
talking is like a circle, it has an effect on my thoughts that is both
pleasant but also makes me feel like I had one bowl too many of fish
brain and mushroom soup. Perhaps it is better if you stop talking."

"I will stop talking if you allow my son to return to the village."

"This is the law, a boy plays the game or he goes for a walk. It is
tradition to give puny boys the mercy of the river, but I grant you
permission to take him to the Bii-eh-ba, who have scrawny warriors. But
you must accompany him, for I could never trust a woman who has a son
that is warrior for another tribe."

"She can not go to the Bii-eh-ba," said Big Mama. "She is our treasure,
without her, no game, and no game, you would have died in a raid and
never been Chief."

"Mother, you speak in the circular fashion like my niece. Stop this!"

"My son is the greatest of all," said Little Mama, "My son will bring
the tribe hands of hands of hands of tall warriors to the Brazos, and
they will raid to the great water and to the lands of the ice and snow."

The crowd burst out laughing.

"Stinky Fingers, the great warrior! Dog Turd, leader of the people!"

"Listen to Little Mama," Big Mama said, "Her words are valuable."

One man kept laughing. The Chief threw his stone hammer and knocked the
laughing man dead where he stood. The laughter stopped.

"I will show you how the magic people taught my son, Tail of Tatanka, to
be the greatest warrior. People of the Brazos, follow me, and bring
sticks of fire."

Tot and Little Mama led the way, the entire tribe followed them, deep
into the forest of the magic people, careful not to step on the
mushrooms along the path, for they were the sacred homes of the magic
people. When they reached the cave, Little Mama said, "I will take the
Chief and Big Mama to see the magic first. You people wait here. Tot,
come with us, hold the stick of fire."

They threaded through the narrow cave entrance, it was difficult for Big
Mama and the Chief, who were tall, but after a dozen paces, it opened up
to wide chamber, with smooth walls.

"When Tot was small, he missed the village very much. Every night, I
would come here and tell him stories of my Uncle, the greatest rebounder
and warrior in tribe history, and of my grandmother, who created the
game that allowed the tribe to prosper. Even though he could not play
the game like the other children, he wanted to know the stories, and I
told them every night. When he was older, I needed to tend to Big Mama
and my nieces, and stayed away longer. I was too tired, and rarely came
into this chamber, as it is dark, and becomes smoky quickly if we bring
fire. Tot, hand me the fire stick."

Tot handed his mother the torch. She guided them to wall and held it up.
There were pictures drawn on the wall. Uncle and Grandmother had never
seen a drawing before -- no one had, except Little Mama, Tot and the
magic people.

"It looks like a woman and girl, and the girl is inflating a ball," Big
Mama said.

"It is," Little Mama said, "The woman is you. The girl is me."

"How can that be? How does the stone know?"

"The stone didn't make this -- Tail of Tatanka made this."

"Magic," The Chief said. "Magic people did this."

"Tail of Tatanka did this. Look here."

They looked at the next section of wall. A woman was flying and laying
down a monster dunk, while two large warriors looked on from the
sidelines.

"Look Uncle, the young one is you. The old man is your father. The woman
is Big Mama."

They moved on. The next panel showed a tall young warrior totally
catching another tall warrior off balance, flailing around like he had
ants in his loincloth.

"Recognize this, Uncle?" Little Mama asked. "It is my favorite memory
from my childhood."

"Yes, beloved niece. That's when I totally bamboozled that foolish man
from the lands west of the Brazos, I think it was the second annual
tournament."

They proceeded through several panels that told the story of the
Na-is-mit tribe and the warriors. Tot knew little of the recent history,
the next generations -- boys just a little older than Tot, were leading
raids west to the land of the sun, and the land of the great salt lake,
exploits that deserved a visual retelling.

They stepped out of the cavern to the waiting tribe outside.

"Go by hands into the cavern, and behold the magic Stinky Fingers has
created."

The tribe went in by hands and they all came out perplexed and amazed.
Many people wanted to touch Tot, and some boys apologized to him for
calling him Dog Turd. One boy asked, "What do you put in your magic
paint that allows it to stick to the walls, it has a familiar smell to
it."

"You sniffed my wall?" Tot asked.

"Yeah," said the boy, "I was so amazed I wanted to get a close look and
I smelled it."

"The magic people told me not to tell anybody," Tot said. "Or they might
come eat you in your sleep."

When all the people had made the inspection and again waited outside the
cave, the Chief consulted with Little and Big Mama and then made a
decree.

"I order my son, Heart of Tatanka, to take two hands of the finest
warriors, except for Red Grasshopper, don't take him. I don't want to
get him injured or killed before the fall season, we play the people of
the White Rock on a road trip, and I'm going to need him to fill up the
lane. Come to think of it, I'm going to need C-Blood and D-Rod as well.
Strike that, I order my son, Heart of Tatanka the third -- just for
clarity -- to take two hands of warriors except for any of the starters,
on a mission to the Bii-eh-ba to make a treaty of peace, they will take
Stinky Fingers \-\-- I mean Tail of Tatanka -- to negotiate using his
magic pictures. Stinky Fingers -- sorry, nephew, do you mind we just
make your warrior's name Stinky Fingers?"

"It's better than Dog Turd," he said.

"Yes, it is. Stinky Fingers eats first, gets first pick of the captives,
and can have that whole row of huts over there by the stone cliffs, so
he can record the stories."

Nobody objected, they had never seen pictures. Many of the young boys
and girls were already outside using sticks to draw in the dirt, and
some kids were even using stones to carve lines into other stones. The
drawing itself didn't amaze the people -- children had been making
doodles and figures and carvings for generations. What amazed the people
-- all the people -- was that Tot could draw things that had happened
before he was born. Was he a spirit that could see the past? Was he
magic?

This may have been the very first instance of Arthur C. Clark's third
law which states, *Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic*.

Right here in Texas, where technology was created. Aren't you Lucky?

### Stinky Fingers

Stinky Fingers went to the Bii-eh-ba with two hands of warriors, led by
the Chief's tallest son, Heart of Tatanka the third, or Hot for short.

The Bii-eh-ba were an interesting people, they had a mix of hefty and
scrawny warriors who like to throw stones and break them against each
other, and to wrestle. Some of them could throw a rock pretty good, but
they had no skills at the tall warrior's game. They weren't much good
for long distance raiding either, they would only run in spurts, they
preferred to take their time eating, and were pretty good hunters
because they didn't move around much.

Hot's warriors setup baskets and demonstrated a game. Two hands of the
best Bii-eh-ba warriors played each other next, and it was disastrous.
The sun was low in the sky and the score was only 2-4. Na-is-mit games
lasted five minutes at most.

"Worthless," Hot tells Stinky Fingers. "Not one guy I would take. That
one big guy, I could put him in to take some fouls, put a little hurt
on. But the rest of them? Useless. Every rebound goes out of bounds,
this game is going to take forever."

"So they're all worthless as warriors?"

"No, not really. Those hefty guys are awesome in a battle. The way I
like to use them is give them a thick branch, maybe double his wingspan
in length, and charge into a line of the enemy and knock them over. Then
you get some of your scrawny guys -- guys like you - and give them a big
rock and they come in after the hefties and jump the enemy on the
ground, they just pound them in the head with the big rocks. Just basic
teamwork. And scrawny guys, sometimes those are the guys that can throw
a rock real hard and accurate. You put the scrawny guys behind the hefty
guys, us tall guys stand back, out of range, where we got a good
tactical view of the battlefield. Works out usually, but that's only
with captives, since all of our warriors are tall. That's where us tall
guys have a disadvantage in battle, we're tall, so we're easy targets
for the rock throwers. Getting hit in the head with a rock hurts.
Sometimes I wish it was me who was chosen by the magic people. I've been
hit in the head with so many rocks, half the time it's from a little
brother behind me, thinks he can throw a stone just because he can hit a
jump shot. Not like I had a choice about it. When I was a little one, I
just wanted to ball with the starters. They don't exactly tell you about
the getting hit in the head with stones part."

"I feel you, cuz," Stinky Fingers said, feeling kinship with a male of
his tribe for the first time.

Two hours later, relieved it was a moonless night, Hot called the game,
the score at 7-4.

The next morning, the Bii-eh-bah as well as the Nai-is-mith warriors
awoke to find Stinky Fingers hanging from a rope, painting the side of a
rock facing. The Bii-eh-bah were mesmerized by the magic at work. They'd
already seen reprints of the Ni-is-mith histories Stinky Fingers had
painted on the inside of the skin of tatanka, which they rolled up and
carried with them.

There were two wall pictures, the first one was of a four-sided diamond
shape. The second was of a rectangular field. Near siesta time, Stinky
Fingers came down from the rock and explained.

The first game involved throwing rocks and defending yourself from rocks
with a piece of deadwood and turning that defense back to offense by
propelling the stone at one of the opposing players. It consisted of
very complicated rules and strategies, which would require careful study
and most of all, independent decision making based on probabilistic
thinking. Not a whole lot of running around, but a lot of rock throwing.

The second game consisted of several of the hefty players forming a
defensive wall while players behind them targeted the enemy with stones,
or threw a ball to his own men, trying to get the ball to end of the
field, where points were scored. After an initial walk through, Hot and
Stinky Fingers decided to remove the rock throwing, as the goal was to
produce as many functional warriors as possible. Like the first game,
this game involved following a preplanned set of maneuvers. Adaptive
adjustment while the play was live was important as well.

The next day, several hands of Bii-eh-ba warriors took the field and
played the games. It was quickly found that both the scrawny and hefty
could play either game, though different size warriors tended to fit
some roles better than others. Linemen were always hefty, but sometimes
hefties could throw a rock. One Bii-eh-ba warrior pointed out, "This is
pretty good, cause one of them is good for the winter, when you're
banging into each other, you don't want to overheat. The other one,
you're mostly standing around throwing rocks or trying to catch rocks,
so not so bad on a hot day." Everybody agreed, that stick-rock was
better for the warm months, especially since it was a good one for the
road, you didn't need a clay court or a field, you could throw rocks at
your brothers in any setting.

The Bii-eh-ba agreed to start training in stick-rock and boar-ball and
Hot took the idea back to his father that he should train some of the
benchwarmer and shorter guys in some of these new lesser sports, that
way they could compare the skill of their warriors to those of their new
allies. The Chief agreed. After two winters, the combined warriors of
the Bii-eh-ba and Na-Is-mit peacefully conquered many lands to the east
and north, and spread these new sports through the Gulf Coast and even
down into ancient Mexico.

After a few years, Heart of Tatanka II died, and his son, Hot became
chief. On his dying bed, the Chief said to his son, "Don't forget the
Be-ek-um, my son. Once, their great warrior called my mother, your
grandmother, Big Mama, the mother of basketball, a very vile name, I
dare not repeat. You must avenge this insult. They have fled south, but
they will not escape our vengeance, my son."

"I will destroy the Be-ek-em, father," Hot said.

A moon after the death of his father, Hot took a contingent of many
hands of tall, hefty and scrawny warriors across the river and sought
the Be-ek-em, who had done quite well in the lands of the snake to the
south and west. After many days of walking, stopping only for a midday
game of stick-rock, the warriors found the Be-ek-em. Hot called them out
to talk peace, leaving a gift of mushrooms from the magic people's
forest. The Be-ek-em sent out an old hunter, who proceeded to eat them
with flourish.

Two of their young warriors came out, fearlessly and without concern.

"What you guys want? Got a sudden craving for snake?"

"We wanted to tell you about our sports league, how we got warriors from
all over the lands, and we're like doing a unification program based on
sports. So instead raiding each other, we can just share food and trade
captives at tournaments. We got three sports, for all the seasons,
there's some crossover but it works out all right."

Stinky Fingers proceeds to unroll the skins of Tatanka and show the
frames of the three sports.

One of the warriors said, "I miss me some tatanka. And mushrooms. Living
on the Brazos was sweet while it lasted."

The other warrior said, "Sorry, we already got a sport. We can play it
anywhere, any season. Let me show you."

A bunch of Be-ek-em warriors came out of the low brush. They had a
boar's bladder and they ran around the wasteland, kicking and guiding
the ball with their feet.

Hot said to Stinky Fingers, "Their field is ten times the size of our
courts. Tall guys can't be running around like that, constantly for
hours. This is the desert. This is what a diet of snake meat and
scorpion will to do you."

"How about as warriors?"

"As warriors, hell yes. Guys that run around like that in the desert are
indestructible, man. We should ally with them. I'm just not asking any
of my kids to subject themselves to this kind of craziness. They can
play their game on their own."

"Well, then how does it work? If we don't play their game, how will we
know if they're good?"

"I didn't actually come here to make peace with them. I got the whole
vengeance thing for the insult to Big Mama."

"No doubt, cuz."

The two warriors came back, sweating but not out of breath.

"Short game," said Hot.

"No, man. That was just a demonstration. We usually play from when we
wake up until sundown, unless we got to help the women with the snakes,
then we might have to cut it short."

"So, you wouldn't be interested in joining our league?"

"You guys got a taste for snake or what, man? Cause way I see it, what
could we bring you, you ain't got already? See any tall warriors out
here? Snakes tend to bite the tall people first, if you know what I
mean."

Hot looks around at his feet, uncomfortably. All his warriors look at
their feet. As they do, they start to notice something else. They were
encircled by Be-ek-em warriors, just a stone's throw away, holding
spears and rocks, waiting patiently.

"This isn't good," Hot said.

"I got this," said Stinky Fingers.

"You got what, little man?" The Be-ek-em warrior wasn't much bigger than
Stinky Fingers himself.

"How did a little runt like you come from this tribe of giants anyway?
Was your mother one of the magic people of the forest, captured by
giants? Does your mother have hairy feet, Stinky Fingers?"

Those were the last words ever uttered by the warrior, for Stinky
Fingers grabbed a large stone and leapt upon the warrior and smashed his
head in. The other Be-ek-em warrior looked stunned for a moment and then
started to raise his hammer. Hot thrust his spear through the warrior's
throat.

"Little warning next time, Stinky," said Hot.

"No worries, cuz. I got this," Stinky Fingers pulls a bladder from his
bag and unties the end, pouring the contents, a dark, runny, gooey and
very stinky concoction, over his head. Hot makes a full circle survey,
seeing the Be-ek-em warriors approaching them from all sides,
outnumbering their contingent by three to one, more than that if you
included the second ring, which involved women[^3] and children warriors
all holding spears or stones.

"People of the Brazos," Stinky Fingers shouts. "What was I when I came
from the forest of the magic people."

"Dog Turd!" came a chorus of shouts.

"And who am I now?"

"Dog Turd!"

"Did you ever wonder what I ate, all those years in the forest with the
magic people?"

Silence. Stinky Fingers, covered in black goo, steps forward from his
line of the tall second-stringers, breaks through the lines of his own
hefty and scrawny warriors, and into the open field, heading directly
toward the largest Be-ek-em warrior, who wasn't very tall but was
carrying a very large stone over his head.

"Nobody wondered what I ate?"

"We thought you ate mushrooms in the forest," said one young warrior.

"You can't eat mushrooms. That's where the magic people live. But you're
close, because the magic people did bring me the food I ate."

Stinky Fingers was literally[^4] a stone's throw from the strong
Be-ek-em warrior holding the large stone over his head, ready to toss
it. Close enough so Stinky Fingers could whisper without being heard by
the line of warriors on either side.

"Hey brother, watch your step there, this heavy brush, you going to step
\-\--"

The warrior glances down but immediate begins to wobble. The stone was
the largest he could find, you always want to be the warrior with the
largest stones, that was a rule of the Eaters of the Snake. The stone
weighed about twice as much as his largest brother, so it took a lot of
strength just to hold it over his head. You didn't want to look down and
lose your balance.

"Step on what?" the warrior whispered.

Stinky Fingers shouted, "Yes, the magic people fed me very well. In
fact, I developed quite a taste for the food they brought me. It was
especially delicious, but in the years I've been back with the people of
the Brazos, I've developed quite a hankering for that flavor."

"Hey, little bro, what am I about to step on?"

"It's by your right foot," Stinky whispered.

"What's by my foot? Which one is my right foot?" he whispered, afraid he
was going to drop the stone and look foolish in front of his football
teammates.

"When you throw a stone, the arm you throw with is usually the right
one," Stinky Finger whispered. "Except for people like me, I use my left
arm to throw, but I'm not a warrior."

"I use both arms to throw stones," whispered the warriors. "Can't you
see?"

"When you wipe after a squat --"

"Wipe? What the hell are you talking about?"

Stinky Fingers realized he was dealing with somebody that basic
innovation had left behind. He made a game time adjustment to his plan.

"What I ate \-\-- was \-\-- was so delicious, and it's something I can
smell again for the first time in years, and I smell a lot of it,"
Stinky Fingers shouted. "And now Dog Turd has a hunger, a vicious
hunger."

"Dog Turd! Dog Turd! Dog Turd!"

Stinky Fingers whispered, "The snake is right there," then made a
dramatic hand gesture ending with a kung-fu pose pointing towards the
warrior's right foot. The warrior looked down frantically, lost his
balance, started to fall backwards, and then lost his grip on the stone
and it dropped square on his face as he hit the ground.

"I ate the children of the eaters of the snake!" Stinky Fingers shouts,
and leaps over the fallen warrior directly toward a group of young boys
in the second line.

The boys turn tail and run as do all the warriors. The Be-ek-em coalesce
into a herd of runners, all headed south. The Na-is-mit warriors didn't
bother with chasing them, as they already knew they could run for hours
in the desert without water. They did it for sport.

The expedition returned to the Brazos as heroes, the celebration lasted
for days.

The empire of Heart and Tail of Tatanka was born. Hot stayed at home on
the Brazos, coaching up new ranks of warrior of all shapes and sizes,
while Stinky Fingers roamed to the North and East, building an empire
through peaceful competition, but sometimes, usually after a mother
insult, outright stone age savagery or magic. Stinky Fingers had many
sons, and they built leagues that spanned the entire continent. The very
first empire, started right here in Texas.

Aren't you lucky?

Texas archaeologists say that the Empire of the Tail and Heart of
Tatanka lasted several centuries. We have no historical record of what
became of them, though there is an account related to a historian by a
former Navajo captive. Legend was that a new people from the ice lands,
who liked to stand in the open like idiots on the prairie and use sticks
to knock round stones into gofer holes, brought with their strange sport
a strange disease and wiped the entire Brazos River empire out of
existence. We might never be able confirm this, but it sounds about
right. One of the constants of Texas History is never trust people from
the land of ice and snow.

### The Canadian

One of the first rules of historical research that every good Texan
needs to know is: Question your sources. You might ask yourself, how do
we know about the origins of the Brazos empire, but not about the fall?

That's a very good question. The answer is in the story.

In 1852, in the early years of Texas statehood, there was a wandering
scoundrel with a Scottish accent and a long beard who was making rounds
in South-East Texas. He'd swindle a farmer out of a goat, using
paperwork and a taxman's badge, or a rancher out of cow, or a merchant
out of his wares, and then skedaddle on to the next town. He'd go by
different names, and every few months he would just disappear, only to
fleece another set of towns a few months later.

After stealing the winter stores of a poor rancher's widow with seven
little mouths to feed, *Los Diablos Tejanos* were called in and formed a
posse. They found a tall German woman who'd been abducted by natives but
sold to a white man, whom she lived with in a cabin on the shores of the
Brazos for several weeks. She remembered the man spent many hours
painting pictures of the river, and kept the paintings rolled up in a
trunk. The man had a notebook with him and would often pull it out to
make sketches and notes. He never hurt or abused the woman, but she was
made to cook and clean the cabin. She spoke little English but the man
knew enough German to give her instructions. The Rangers spoke to other
victims and several others remembered a sketchbook. The German woman
also remembered what she thought was an Indian man who came to the cabin
one day and talked to the man for several hours. A day after the Indian
visited, the man left and didn't return for two days. The woman was
confused, because the man had led her to believe he was sent by her
brother. The woman followed a trail and eventually came across a group
of settlers who got her to Navasota where she was able to write to her
brother, who had settled in Waco.

The woman had not been able to point the Rangers to the cabin, but they
roamed the area to the south of Navasota on the east side of the river.
Several farmers in the area told the Rangers they thought the Indian was
Karankawa Joe, a crazy man who was known to rob cabins for liquor and
had been suspected of poaching, but nobody knew where he lived or where
he came from. The Karankawa were down near the coast and none of the
local tribes claimed him. That might have been all there was to the
story.

In 1854, the Rangers finally caught up with old Karankawa Joe. Joe was a
Tejano who'd been captured as a boy and traded around the tribes before
finally ending up with a Karankawa family who made the mistake of
introducing him to alcohol. The Rangers found Joe in a jail in Houston,
after getting beaten for trying to cheat at cards. He admitted to
trading with the Scotsman but not to any criminal activity, only that he
took him to the site of the ancient people to make his drawings. He had
told the man that the German woman had made it to town and reported on
him, and that *Los Diablos Tejanos* were looking for the both of them,
and at that time, Joe had headed east for Louisiana for a few months.
The Rangers had Joe guide them to the cabin, but it was empty and
abandoned.

"My people don't like this area, it's got the spirit of the tall
warriors," Joe told the rangers.

"You mean the Tejanos? Or the Injuns? Just who is your people, Joe?"

"The peoples who drink from the Brazos," said Joe.

"Fools. You mean the fools who drink from the Brazos? I don't let my
horse drink that water, partner."

The mystery of the Scotsman remained.

In 1889, a young teacher named James Naismith from Canada arrived at
Navasota, showing a painting of the banks of a muddy river, that many
said resembled the Brazos, but no one recognized the exact location. It
was suggested that he find Karankawa Joe, who was known to be found on
the Brazos.

James found Joe on the river at San Felipe where James explained his
quest. His father had died when he was young, and he was trying to put
together missing pieces. His father had told him that this painting was
the secret to a great treasure, and when his son was old enough, he
should go to Texas and find the cabin. His father had died before
explaining any more.

"I knew your father," said Joe. "He was a scoundrel, the *Los Diablos
Tejanos* was looking for him, but he only stole to support his work,
which was the study of the magic people of the forest."

"Like Leprechauns?" James asked.

"I ain't never been to Ireland," Joe said. "How would I know? They live
under mushrooms here, where do Leprechauns hide?"

"Under clovers, I think," James said, unsure about the subject.

"Damn, everything is bigger in Texas," said Joe. "Even our magic little
people."

"What was he studying exactly? You said he was making drawings?"

"I'll show you," Joe said, guiding James to his canoe. They paddled
upriver from San Felipe for a day, then hiked up along the banks for an
hour, where they found the cabin, just like the painting. The cabin was
abandoned, and falling apart, but Joe was able to find a shovel.
Together they stood on a rise that overlooked both the cabin and the
river, matching the painting exactly.

"You see the flower," Joe said. "That's a bluebonnet. Only flower in the
whole picture, like over there, between the trees."

"There's no flower now," James said.

"It's August. What kind of teacher are you anyway, think you find a
bluebonnet in bloom in August?"

"Physical Education," James said.

"What's that?"

"Sports."

"Oh, sports? That's - there is a white man's word for it, I just can't
think of it right now, but there's a word for it. You are into sports,
and he told you this painting was your great treasure?"

"Sentimental?"

"No, not sentimental," said Joe, pondering how to explain. "Like if you
had an entire bag of spoons, but you really needed a knife."

"Are you a waiter, in a restaurant?"

"No, partner. Just forget it. Your father was obsessed with the cave of
the magic people, he wanted to sketch all the drawings, and just would
steal food and trick these stupid Texans out of money to pay for his
drawing materials."

"My father could draw?"

"He is the one who painted the painting. You didn't know that?"

"If he could draw, I wonder why he pointed me towards athletics. I
always thought I'd be a good artist, but papa pushed me towards the
physical arts."

"Well it is probably because *Los Diablos Tejano* was looking for a man
with a Scottish accent who could draw, and let me tell you, *Los Diablos
Tejanos* ain't afraid of any Northman. Your dad have a Scottish accent?"

"A bit, because he was from Scotland, yes he did."

"He was afraid of the Rangers, partner. He couldn't let them Rangers
figure it out."

They walked down the rise to the spot where the flower had been in the
painting. Joe handed James the shovel and said, "You're the athletic
one, dig. Only a fool digs a hole in August in Texas."

"In Canada, we can only dig holes in summer, because the ground is
frozen most of the year."

"Did you ever think maybe that was a clue you should head south?"

"No, we love it. In winter you can skate across the frozen lakes. We
love to play hockey, it's the sport of the kings."

"Boy, you better get digging, and stop with this stupid talk. There's
only three sports worth playing, unless you're a snake eater. Frozen
lakes!"

James dug for a few minutes and then hit something solid. It was a
chest. He finished digging, and pulled it up out of the hole.

"Gosh darnnit, Joe. It's locked. What are we going to do now? Do you
think dear old dad left a key, maybe there's a clue in the painting?"

Joe picked up the shovel and with just a bit of force, dropped it on the
chest, which split open.

"That's been buried in Brazos mud for thirty years, boy. I asked him
what the point of locking it was if he was going to bury it, but he
wanted a lock, so I sold him a lock."

James picked apart the chest and found several wooden rollers and
another smaller box that contained a notebook. The drawings were very
precise, and the first one looked very familiar to James.

"Baseball, this looks like a drawing of a baseball game, sort of like a
rule book."

"That's exactly what it is."

He pulled another tube and un-scrolled the painting. It looked a very
basic game of football, which James had believed was derived from the
noble British sport of rugby. He'd always believed baseball, grand
American past time, had originated with the British as well. He said as
much to Joe.

"No. What happened was the Conquistadors captured a Tonkawa medicine man
and made him tell their translator the rules of the three ancient sports
of the Brazos empire people. The Tonkawa was clever, so he told them the
rules for the two lesser sports -- baseball and football, and instead of
telling them the rules of the most noble game, he substituted the rules
of the snake eater's game, and told them that it was the most noble game
of the Brazos people that made them great warriors that conquered the
entire continent. As a secret part of the *Treaty of Madrid*, the
British and Spaniards split up the rule book, the Spaniards thinking
they kept the most noble sport for themselves. But the Spaniards was who
got tricked."

"What is most noble sport? You mean cricket?"

"No, fool. It's that last painting, and the whole notebook is filled
with sketches."

James pulled the last painting out, it was a reproduction showing Big
Mama slamming the ball in the basket. He flipped through the notebook,
pages and pages of sketches of basketball plays.

"How come nobody came here before?"

"They all get sick. This cabin here, was built by a really tall Swede,
he didn't get sick but he didn't know how to talk friendly to the
people," Joe said. "My people run him off."

"Which people?"

"What do you mean, fool? My people."

"Did my father get sick?"

"No, he didn't."

"You aren't sick either," James said.

"I got herbs and potions and stay drunk most of the time, counteracts
the magic. Curious that you aren't sick. What did you say your name was
again?"

"James Naismith."

"Sounds awful similar to Na-is-mit."

"What's that?"

"The name of the old people who lived here, the tall warriors whose
empire stretched from sea to sea. Your father told me another name, a
name I didn't know back in those days when I was young. But I recognize
it now. He told me his name was Lokey."

"Lokey? I've never heard of a Scot name like Lokey, but I grew up in
Canada. Maybe it's like a secret name."

"Secret name?"

"Like, Karankawa Joe, that's not your Christian name, but like your
Texas name."

"No, that's my name. The Karankawa gave me to a Lutheran family, they
already had a son name Joe, so they called him Bible Joe and me
Karankawa Joe. That's my name, they signed me for school, and it what
they put on the wanted posters back in the day when they was looking for
me and your pa."

"Well, that's all good, but can we move on to the cave? I'd like to see
it before I head back to Canada."

"Okay, pick up your pa's stuff and we'll head over there. We'll need a
lantern."

They stowed the notebook and paintings at the cabin and begin the hike
through the forest of the magic people.

As they walked, James commented, "These are some big mushrooms. Hey,
what's that stand over there."

There was a wood box nailed on a platform hung between two trees.

"Oh, that's my explosives cache. Anybody up and down the river, they
need something blown up, they know to get word to Karankawa Joe, he'll
come on his canoe and blast what needs blasting."

"Where did you get the explosives?"

"Didn't your mama teach not to ask too many questions?" Joe asked. "I
had eight different mamas, eight different languages, they all taught me
that. You people in the ice lands don't got no mamas?"

"Excuse me, sir. I implore you, I meant no offense."

"The cave is right up here, up this little gulley there's the entrance,
but the rock extends back out into the hill. I had to chase bears out of
here twenty years ago, but all these Germans done the job for me since,
them people can make sausage out of anything."

"Speaking of Germans, what was the deal with the German lady that got my
father chased by the Texas Rangers?"

"Oh," Joe said, "That's the magic people. They convinced your pa that
the German lady was the witch Aslaug. After a few days, your father
figured out the magic people were just pulling his leg, cause she
refused to do anything magic or evil. These magic people -- well any
Texan or Tejano, big or small, we like to pull pranks when foreigners
first arrive. We got all the traditions, depends on where the foreigner
is coming from, we got a set for the ice people, and for the land of the
sun people. Pranks always funnier the longer you can keep them
guessing."

"So you're like doing it to me now, talking about magic little people?"

"Oh, no. Magic little people is real. We got different types but they
ones live on the Brazos is funny. I don't care for the little people
down in the snake land, vicious little buggers. These fellers up around
here, they're pretty good, if you can stay upwind."

Joe guides them to the entrance of the cave, a rock outcropping deep in
a gulley. Joe stopped, sparked the lanterns, and they squeezed in
through the narrow entrance. The first chamber was small, just below the
surface. It had some venting and there were clear runoff trails from the
drainage. Joe pointed through a narrow crack.

"You're bigger than I am, if you don't think you can squeeze, you can
get on all fours, it's wider down at the bottom."

"I think I can make it," said James.

They squeezed through the meandering crack and came into a big wide
cavern, with a tall roof.

"What's that smell?" James asked.

"Bat shit, mostly. There was all kinds of critters up in here when me
and your father came here. It was the strangest things, whole mess of
bats come flying out that cave just as we got down in the gulley, middle
of the day. We see bats round here all the time, but it's usually at
dusk."

"I don't see the bats?"

"I guess they moved on. I been in caves where you can creep up and grab
one without waking the rest of the cauldron."

"Why would you want to grab a bat?" James asked.

"Boy, I done told you about asking questions. Are you the spawn of a
beast or something, what kind of mama let you talk like that? I about
done had it!"

"Pardon me," said James. "I meant no offense."

"Come on then, we're here. Get up close to the wall."

They brought the lanterns close to the wall, the walls were unusually
smooth, but covered with a thick layer of dust.

"What I heard from some old Tejanos was back before the Spaniards came,
the Tonkawa said there used to be a tall wizard who'd walk these woods
and watch over the place, and sometimes he'd let the people come up here
and look at the walls, it was always clean like a shrine back in those
days. There was a lot more dust when your father was here. "

Joe pulled out his foot long Bowie and gently scraped the wall clean.

James was amazed.

"It's exactly like the drawings and the painting."

![A picture containing text Description automatically
generated](./images/media/image2.jpeg){width="3.5828062117235344in"
height="3.8472222222222223in"}

Figure 1 - sketch of cave drawing from James Naismith\'s notebook

"Yeah, your dad would come up here every day for a few hours, as long as
he could take it, smoke builds up pretty quick, and it is hard to see
the entire picture at once, so he would take his time, do his doodles,
then head out for a breather."

"This might be one of the greatest historical discoveries of all time."

"Discovery? All the old people know about this place, know where it is
at least."

"Don't you understand, Joe? This sport -- this might be the origin of
sports, athletics. This might be the original game the ancient people of
America played, before the Greeks. I wonder why father kept it to
himself, he could have become a famous man, a legend of archaeology."

"*Los Diablos Tejanos*," Joe said. "Like I told you, all the folks round
here know about this place, just none of them can go into this forest
without getting sick. If he'd gone back to the ice lands and talked
about his 'discovery' the Rangers would have got word, brung him back."

"As I understand it, he was just accused of some cheating and theft, no
violence. He could have waited a few years."

"Wouldn't make no difference," Joe said. "The thing that got the Rangers
in the first place, I don't know if you heard, was the widow of a Ranger
named Walker. Your father stopped by and she fed him after he chopped
some wood. He got up to some tricks after dinner, and there was a
scuffle and some words I won't repeat, and your father got hold of their
rifle and loaded up the widow's mule with their stores and took off.
That oldest boy, well, when the Rangers came out and heard the story,
they took that boy with them and trained him up. He's like a major big
ass in the Rangers now, Cordell I think his name is. You should be
scared. Boy, word gets back up to Austin you sniffing around down here,
he bound to come after you instead of your daddy. It's his mother got
the insult. *Los Diablos Tejanos* not going to forget about that."

They worked their way along the wall for another hour, until the buildup
of smoke got to be too much. They went back to the gulley.

"You say my father finished with the sketches?"

"Well, yeah. He was just making the painting out of the clay flat, near
the Swede's cabin. He was trying to figure the dimensions out, where the
trees were in the old people's time, so he could figure out how far
apart to put the baskets,"

"Interesting. Doesn't really matter much, does it?"

"Well, if you look in the notebook you'll see some symbols, look like
hands? Your father thought those symbols with like the ancient's version
of math. If he could figure out where the trees were up in the flats, he
could translate them into your people's math, so he could know how large
to build the building."

"That sounds like the first instance of writing. Unbelievable, the
ancient Texans invented writing and mathematics? What kind of building?"

"He called it all something fancy like a gymnasium, like he was an
ancient Greek or something. He said, it was too cold to play this kind
of sport outdoors in the winter in your lands, but it was the perfect
indoor sport. My people, we go indoors, we like to take a nap, not run
around."

"I'm beginning to see where my father was headed with this."

"Yeah, he shoulda never pissed off *Los Diablos Tejanos*," Joe said. "He
could have fooled them people up in your lands into believing he
invented the most noble sport. I guess he sent you down here to continue
his dream."

"Joe," said James. "How long before word gets around to that Ranger?"

"Oh," Joe said, "I'd give you at least a week. All I heard about was a
Yankee asking about where a painting was painted up on the Brazos.
Unless you want to square it away for good with Walker, I'd go ahead and
head out in the morning."

Joe and James headed back to the cabin, where Joe pan fried a catfish
with mushrooms, herbs and some chili peppers. After dinner, Joe
commenced to heavy drinking and fell asleep. James pretended to sleep
for an hour, then quietly snuck out to the stand of explosives on the
river. He opened the box, took out two sticks of dynamite and a long
fuse and returned to the cabin. He crept back in, made sure Joe was
still sleeping, and gathered the notebook and the painting tubes into a
makeshift rucksack he made with his blanket. He planted both sticks of
dynamite under the cabin and lit the fuse.

The explosion blew the cabin to pieces, killing Joe.

James waited until dawn, and then carried an entire box of dynamite down
to the cave. He placed sticks around the entire gallery and entrance,
and then rolled out a very long fuse. The entire cave blew up and then
collapsed, leaving no trace. It was now just a rumble of rocks in a
muddy gulley off the Brazos.

Young Texas Historians, I think you probably can figure out the rest. No
one in central Texas ever saw Karankawa Joe again, it was just figured
he'd gone to the river. Cordell Walker, Texas Ranger, did eventually
hear about the strange Canadian with a painting looking for Karankawa
Joe.

There was one trader who'd run across a man fitting the Canadian's
description. He'd passed the man carrying his belonging in a blanket on
foot, on the trail up east of Tyler. The trader took pity on the man,
who said his name was So-no-lo-ki.

"So-no-lo-ki? Sounds like an injun name," said Walker.

"What I said," said the trader. "I asked him, was he injun, he was
dressed like a Yankee, but had this smell about him, needed a washing.
He said he came from the land of ice and snow."

"He was gone in the morning," said the trader. "Didn't steal nothing,
and I didn't think much of it, but when I got up to Kilgore I asked
around about the stranger, guess that's how you heard about it."

No one else had seen or heard about the stranger, and Walker had to give
up his search.

This same James Naismith went back to Canada, and then tricked his way
into a teaching position at the YMCA in Springfield, Massachusetts. Not
long after starting this position, he claimed to have "invented" the
game of basketball, never mentioning to anyone his adventure in Texas.

Students, you now know the origins of the two common Texas sayings.
*Never Trust a stranger James*, and *Beware the Canadians, they'll steal
your dreams*.

Students, not all Canadians are bad, you just got to test them out make
sure they've taken their medicine before you can share your plans with
them. And Jameses, Texas born Jameses are always okay. Even James Bowie
and James Fanin weren't born in Texas.

Stranger James just needs to be fully committed to Texas before you let
one saddle your horse.

### The Defender of Texas History

Critical students of history may have some questions. If Naismith killed
Karankawa Joe, and destroyed the caves, how do we know what happened?
How can this be history, and not just a ghost story? It can't be history
if it's just stories, that's the first rule of history. You must have
evidence.

That brings us to the most important part of the story, and the lesson
that brings this tale into modern times.

On Juneteenth 1984, Hakeem Olajuwon, a Nigerian student athlete from the
University of Houston was in New York City for the NBA draft. Like all
foreign or out-of-state students attending Texas universities, he had
taken the mandatory Texas History course that is normally required in
the seventh grade before formally enrolling at U of H. The very same
class you are now taking, minus this chapter of course, because it
wasn't history yet.

Hakeem was picked first. After the picks were announced, new NBA
commissioner David Stern invited Hakeem, Sam Bowie, and Michael Jordan,
the top three picks of the draft, to accompany him back to NBA
Headquarters on Park Avenue. The three rookies had a good time, happy
and laughing it up, excited about the future. Michael talked the most.
Hakeem noticed that when Sam was talking Michael got this strange look
in his eyes, like he might try to rip Sam's throat out with his teeth.

Stern took them to his fabulous office.

"Make yourself at home, Akeem and Michael," Stern said. "Sam, come with
me. You two wait here, we might be a little while."

Sam followed Stern.

"I wonder where he's taking Sam?" Hakeem asked.

"They giving Sam the talk. Sam going to Portland. Go to Portland, you
get the talk."

"What talk, Michael? Clyde went to Portland last year, I wonder if he
got the same talk?"

"Something about the bigfoots. Clyde need to get a different talk, this
year, *Dream*."

"What do you mean, Michael?"

"Clyde is a guard. That mean he gets to guard me. That's the talk he
needs. How to look the fool talk. You know what a fool is, *Dream*?"

"Clyde is no fool, Michael. He is my friend."

"Don't matter, you a friend, you my brother, you my teammate, but sure
as hell if you trying to guard me, you a fool. A fool is who I wag my
tongue at, *Dream*."

"You better not stick your tongue out at me, Michael."

Michael looked up at Hakeem and saw he was serious. "We cool, *Dream*.
Don't you worry. It look like I got to face you again in the playoffs
and you got a real team, I got a plan."

"What's your plan, Michael?"

"You'll know it when you see it," Michael said. "I'm bored, let's look
around."

They got up and started looking at the walls of David Stern's office.
Michael stopped at one framed advertisement, Doctor J selling Converse
shoes. "This is what I'm talking about, *Dream*. I'm going to sell me
some shoes, make an athlete rich."

"That's good, Michael. We can lead the way for a more equitable income
for everyone in the league."

"Whatcha talking about, *Dream*? I didn't say athletes, I said rich
athlete. Me. There ain't going to be anything left for any other
athletes to sell. I'm going to sell me some shoes, sell me some razors,
like Joe Namath, sell me some underwear."

"Underwear? Who wants to buy your underwear, Michael?"

"Everybody going to want to wear my underwear, *Dream*. They want to be
like me."

"I don't think so, Michael."

"You just wait. Going to sell me some water, put some Mike vitamins in
it, call it Mike's water. Mike's steak, Mike's shoes, man those going
cost. What they pay you for rent down there in Houston, *Dream*?"

"Nobody paid me for rent, Michael."

"What the hell kind of fraternity is *Phi Slamma Jamma* they don't pay
your rent? You *The Dream*."

"A nice apartment around the University costs about \$300 a month."

"That's it, *Dream*. Shoes is going to cost \$300, you want to be like
me."

"I think your plan needs some more thought," Hakeem said. "What's this?
It's so familiar."

Hakeem approached a painting that was hung on the back wall of David
Stern's office. It was a landscape of a muddy river in the background,
and a grove of trees and a grassy flat, with a single blue flower.

"This is so familiar," Hakeem said. "This reminds me of something."

"Is that where you lived in Africa?"

"No Michael, I lived in Lagos, a huge modern city, one of the biggest in
the world."

"I thought you was from Africa?"

"Michael, did you ever go to class and learn anything at all?"

"Class? What the hell is class?" Michael said.

"I remember now," Hakeem said. "This looks like the place Moses took me.
On the weekends, after working out at Fonde, Moses would drive me out of
town into the Texas countryside. It looks exactly like that place. Moses
said it was a special nature preserve for tall people."

"You went on a picnic with Moses Malone?"

"Several times. It was peaceful. He would go out there, have some food,
take a nap, and get in touch with the spirit of rebounding."

The painting was hung high, right at Hakeem's eye level. He noticed that
the painting was slightly askew. He reached up to level it, happy to
find a familiar reminder of Texas in the strange city of the ice and
snow. He nudged it a half a turn to the right, the wall swung backwards
and a passageway opened up.

"Good job, *Dream*," Michael said. "You found the place they keep all
that NBA money. Let's go."

Before Hakeem could stop him, Michael charged through the passageway.

"I told you," Michael called. "Gold."

Hakeem crouched down and made his way through the narrow passage. At the
entrance, Michael was inspecting a pyramid of gold bars stacked on a
pedestal. Beyond that, Hakeem saw another pedestal, on which sat a
notebook. Along the walls hung framed blow-ups of drawings and a few
paintings.

"Look at all this gold," Michael said.

"Look at these sketches," Hakeem said.

The first sketch had a plaque.

> *In 1889, basketball founder James A. Naismith discovered the very
> first archeological evidence of a civilization that invented sports,
> art, writing, mathematics, feminism, and fishing on the banks of the
> Brazos River. These ancient people built a sprawling civilization
> thousands of years before these innovations were passed on to Eurasia
> and Africa. Naismith tried to bring his discoveries to academia but
> was hunted by The Texas Rangers who wanted to keep the secrets of
> history to themselves. In consultation with industry leaders, it was
> decided to keep most of the history secret, as it could upset the
> existing power dynamic. In a last-ditch effort to keep the history
> secret, the evil Texas Ranger Cordell Walker blew up the caves and
> this notebook is the only remaining evidence of the location of the
> true cradle of civilization, in what is now Austin County, Texas, on
> the shores of the Brazos.*

"This is unbelievable. Michael, basketball, not soccer is the first true
sport. And it was invented by the ancient Texans."

"Michael Jordan invented basketball," Michael said, gingerly stuffing
the small but heavy gold bars into the pockets of his jeans. "That's all
people going to remember after I pay all the companies with this gold."

"Pay what companies?"

"Pay the companies to let me sell the stuff, so people can be like me."

"I don't think that's the way it works, Michael. They are supposed to
pay you."

"First you got to pay them, or else they'll let somebody else sell the
stuff. I got to pay a lot, so the companies will stop paying Magic and
Bird."

"I don't think so," said Hakeem.

"James Worthy told me," Michael said.

"I was told never to trust a stranger James," said Hakeem. "In Texas
History."

"Texas History?" Michael said. "What the hell is that?"

"It's a class -- actually it's the most important class, for if we
forget the past we will fail the future. Didn't you have North Carolina
history in school?"

"*Dream*, you funny," Michael said. "North Carolina history began on
February 17^th^, 1963 when Michael Jordan was born, 'cept I wasn't born
there I was born in Brooklyn. No, North Carolina history began in New
Orleans on March 29, 1982 when Michael Jordan brought the Tar Heels the
championship. That's North Carolina history."

"I think it's just something they say in Texas, but they made us
memorize it," Hakeem said.

"We got one like that in Carolina. '*Never let dumbass Daryl hold the
keys*,'" Michael quoted.

"I don't know anything about Daryl," Hakeem said. "I know a coach named
Carroll, works for the Rockets."

"Daryl, Harold, Farrell, Carol, it don't matter, sounds like Daryl, it
must be like Daryl," said Michael. "Just don't let nobody sounds like
dumbass Daryl hold the keys."

"So many things to remember. There was so much to learn about Texas. I
had to take the class before they'd let me enroll at the University. I
was jet-lagged from the flight from Nigeria. There was something else,
maybe, *Take your dreams to Canada?* It was so hard to stay awake, I
never had jet lag before that. I should really take the yearly refresher
class when I get back to Houston."

"You funny, *Dream*."

Hakeem continued to inspect the drawings. He was amazed. He had always
thought Africa was the cradle of civilization, but given what he knew
from Texas History, it wasn't surprising. Baseball, football, soccer and
fishing, and one of the drawings had symbolic representation of hands,
an ancient form of mathematics. He always knew there was something
special about basketball, he was magnetically drawn to it the first time
he dunked the ball, despite having loved soccer growing up.

"Michael," Hakeem said. "I think James Naismith stole this from Texas.
This is a treasure of Texas History. It's the first duty of a Texan to
preserve and protect Texas History. I'm going take it back with me."

Hakeem took the notebook and carefully hid it in his jacket pocket.

"I'm going take this gold," Michael said, all four pockets stuffed with
gold bars. He also had gold bars stuffed into his shoes.

"Michael, you look ridiculous. Commissioner Stern will notice you, and
when we get down to the cars and the hotel, somebody might see you and
take pictures."

"Nobody going to see me, *Dream*."

"Michael, I'm looking right at you. I can see the gold bars sticking out
of your pockets."

"That's because you special, *Dream*," said Michael. "I noticed that
when we played you the first time. Don't know why, maybe you from
Africa, but nobody ever see what I don't want them to see. Maybe we got
the same ability."

"What do you mean, Michael?"\
"Like when you foul some fool in a game, and the referee never sees it.
They never see me foul, even though I foul a fool every time. You get
that?"

"Michael, if I foul somebody, I make sure that they see it."

"Well, I think it's cause I was born under a bad sign," said Michael.

"Michael, we were born a month apart. What are you talking about?"

"I don't know what it means, it is just something all the fool's mamas
been saying about me since I was in high school. 'cept for this one tall
fool I played, he was blond and from Sweden. His mama always screaming
at me, *'Low-key! Low-key!'*"

"Low key?" Hakeem wasn't always sure about American slang, but he was
pretty sure that Michael Jordan didn't fit the definition of *low key*.

"I don't know, I figured it was *born under a bad sign* in her language,
it's what all the other mamas would say."

With a great deal of effort, Michael slogged through the passageway back
into Stern's office, followed by Hakeem. Hakeem rotated the painting,
and the passageway closed behind him.

A few minutes later, Commissioner Stern came back without Sam Bowie.
"Thanks for waiting, you guys want to go out to a club or something, or
go see a show?"

"Thanks commissioner," Hakeem said. "I need to go back to the hotel,
call my parents."

"Me too," said Mike. "It's been a long day."

Stern guided them down the hall. To Hakeem's genuine surprise, David
Stern failed to notice Michael's unusual bow-legged gait. Hakeem walked
behind the two of them and as if by magic, David Stern adopted Michael
Jordan's gait, two cartoon characters, tall and short, slogging down the
corridor, like they were on a planet where gravity was three times that
of Earth's. Once they got in the elevator, it got very awkward as
Commissioner Stern insisted on standing very close to Michael, and
Hakeem was sure Stern would notice the gold bars, but Stern just stared
up at Michael's face, silly grin on his face.

"Commish, you going to give me all the phone numbers of them guys run
all the companies?"

"Sure, Michael. There's really only one number you need to call, my
friend, Keyser."

"That's good," Michael said. "I have to talk to too many people,
somebody going to look like a fool."

"Very good, Michael."

They made it down to the street level, and sure enough there was a crowd
of people waiting, most of them screaming, "*Michael! Michael!*" but
there were a few shouting, "*Akeem, The Dream!*" Nobody seemed to notice
the bars of gold sticking out Michael's pockets.

When he got back to the hotel, Hakeem quickly went to his room, gathered
his things, and headed straight for the airport and took the red eye
back to Houston. He called Houston Rockets assistant coach Rudy
Tomjanovich, who, like Hakeem, wasn't originally from Texas, but had
taken the mandatory Texas History for adults refresher course with the
rest of the team in 1971 when the Rockets moved from San Diego to
Houston. They went back to Rudy's house and consulted the Young
Discoverers handout he'd kept from his class. Rudy knew what they had to
do. They immediately drove to Rudy's office at The Summit and made
photocopies of all pages of the notebook. They then hid the notebook in
a secret chamber in the basement of The Summit.

Rudy consulted businessman Tilman Fertitta and together they took the
copies to Austin, where the three of them met with Governor White.
Governor White made a few calls, and the next day, Vice President George
H.W. Bush arrived with his eldest son, where they discussed options. A
secret emergency session of the Texas Legislature was held, and a writ
of vengeance was levied against Canada for theft of historical treasure.
Much of the legislature urged immediate retaliation, but in a rousing
speech, Bush the younger urged caution.

"We can use this to our advantage," Bush said.

"They stole our history!" shouted one lawmaker.

"Did they insult anybody's momma?" Bush asked.

The crowd hushed and whispers rang throughout the halls of the Texas
Capitol. Lawmakers in the pocket of the petrochemical industry were
mesmerized by visions of having a Texan in Washington who sounded like a
Texan. Lawmakers on the other side of the aisle were just mesmerized by
the twang.

In 1994 Hakeem Olajuwon would bring Texas its first NBA championship,
avenging the metaphorical insult by defeating the tall warriors from the
lands of the ice and snow in seven games. The next year, he would defeat
the giants from the land of the dwarves in four games, repeating as
champions.

George Bush signed the secret *Treaty of San Felipe* on January 21^st^,
2001 just four days after taking office as President of the United
States. Canadian Prime Minister Jean ChrÃ©tien ceded Texas all mineral
royalties in Alberta, in payment for the insult of historical theft, and
Texas agreed to not reveal to the world the facts of the matter, that it
was a Texas woman and not a Canadian who invented basketball. The treaty
was to last eighty years or until the oil ran out. It was a huge secret
win, in the early days of his presidency.

The glory of Bush's Texas patriotism was short lived -- on August 2,
2001 the Canadians pulled off the ultimate '*stranger James*' double
cross by trading for Texas hero Hakeem Olajuwon. Bush had the
joint-chiefs prepare for full land-invasion of Alberta but then dropped
the plan. Mysteriously, he stopped taking phone calls from Texas
politicians the day Jay-Z dropped *The Blueprint*.[^5] The *Treaty of
San Felipe* was erased from U.S. History. Just another illustration of
the necessity of having our own Texas History.

Hakeem Olajuwon would escape from Ontario in a jet the next summer and
return to Texas. Unfortunately, due to some miscommunication and
lingering effects of the Rockets' misjudgment of value, neither Rudy nor
Hakeem mentioned to management the hidden location of Naismith's
notebook. Today, the notebook remains hidden in the basement of Lakewood
Church, who took over the Summit in 2003.

Texas History remains safe in God's hands.

Hakeem Olajuwon is a historical legend and a defender of Texas History.
Without his keen eye and ability to completely ignore Michael Jordan's
cloak of vanity, we might never have known that Texas was the cradle of
civilization and birthplace of human genius.

It's funny how history works and some people just happen to be in the
right place at the right time. Texas, fortunately, has been home to many
of them, such as the likes of Jim Bowie and Sam Houston. Hakeem is one
of those people, a hero with a life too good to be true. When it is
true, it's history.

Aren't you lucky?

Remember young Texans, never trust a stranger James, and watch out for
the dream-stealing Canadians. It doesn't matter if you were born here,
or just got here just as fast as you could, it's your duty as a Texan,
to appreciate and preserve the legacy of our history.

Our heroes are but human.

It is the stories we tell about them that make them genius.

Rocket Man, out

August 2^nd^, 2022

***The Book of Scoot***

SECOND FOUNDATION

**Version 2.13**

![A silhouette of a person riding a scooter Description automatically
generated](./images/media/image3.png){width="3.0679746281714784in"
height="3.0679746281714784in"}

![A group of people wearing helmets Description automatically generated
with low
confidence](./images/media/image4.jpg){width="4.620138888888889in"
height="3.6958333333333333in"}

NASA FLIGHT CREW STS-51-L

Ellison Onizuka

Christa McAuliffe

Gregory Jarvis

Judith Resnik

Michael Smith

Dick Scobee

Ronald McNair

**The Foundation is Gratitude**

Dick Scobee

Scoot(1)
========

*It is my belief that by the manned exploration and exploitation of the
potentials of space and the planets, we satisfy a basic need of mankind
to explore and probe the unknown, and I simply want to be an integral
part of that exploration*.

-   **Excerpt from Dick Scobee's NASA interview essay, answering "Why I
    want to be an astronaut**."[^6]

**Integral** -- adjective -- essential to completeness

What is the integral component of manned exploration of space and the
planets?

One Scobee is the unit that defines that integral.

I stake this Scoot with that mission. To define the integral of manned
spaceflight. I seek others who knew the man to share with me what they
think is the integral. I want to know what Colonel Scobee thought.

I'll ask his family.

*O say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave*

*O\'er the land of the free and the home of the brave*

Dick Scobee lived with his family in my hometown.

Bravery.

I think the integral of manned space flight is bravery.

*The Foundation is Gratitude*

JUNE Scobee RODGERS

Scoot(23)
=========

In [***Collecting Responsibility***](#_Collecting_Responsibility), I
recount a moment of inspiration. I wrote about *Challenger* in terms of
a postcard I'd lost. It was a critical breakthrough in my thinking.
Later that night it was as if the basketball gods were blessing my idea
because KPJ destroyed the Bucks, dropping 50 points. It is a good story,
and it happened like I wrote it.

It wasn't until much later that it hit me; I'd already finished writing
the book and realized something even more profound. It's an even better
story. This work is a testament to genius, so I'll keep the
embellishment down to a Texas minimum.

I was curious, I remembered *Challenger* well, one of the few moments in
high-school I can see clearly through the cobwebs of time. I also
remember who I was, what I was like, and there was some incongruity. How
did my mom get me to a NASA nerd camp when I was fourteen?

After a full year of 6^th^ grade, I'd left my nerd roots behind. I still
read science fiction but wasn't hanging out with other nerds who did.
Summer after 7^th^ grade was the last run of my suburban rap/breakdance
crew. Thankfully, this occurred before digital photography. Home videos
of teenagers doing stupid stuff was for rich people. Summer after 8^th^
grade, I was hanging with kids who listened to metal and hated school,
friends I'd have through high school. I know I wasn't volunteering to go
to a NASA summer camp.

My Uncle Clay, retired Air Force, had broken the news to me years
before. One summer it was, *with your glasses you'll never be a fighter
pilot*. Gave it to me raw, then told me how he found out he was
colorblind. I think the story was he didn't even know until after he'd
already signed up for the Air Force, hoping to become a pilot. The Air
Force doctors told him. No jets for Uncle Clay, but he made a career out
of military intelligence.

I'd left astronaut dreams behind in grade school, along with the nerds.
I wasn't a computer geek. I didn't even like to play video games at
home, though the arcade was cool place to hang out. I couldn't
understand how I ended up at NASA camp at that age. I asked my mother.

"You got picked because you were good at math," my mom said.

"Oh really," I say, not sure why that would have made a difference.

"Did you have to pay?"

"Oh, no," said my mom. "You went because it was free."

And then I got it. I get along with my mom great now, but as a teenager
if there was a way to get me far away from her and it was free, she was
first in line. My mom could walk into a supermarket in the 1980s with a
box of coupons and walk out with two carts of groceries and \$50 cash in
rebates.

She'd camp out like it was for concert tickets, to get rid of me for a
few weeks in the summer. I can see my teen-self would have made peace
with the fact it was all the way in Clear Lake, far away from where
anybody might know me where I lived in Cypress.

I had no interest in computers at all. As a kid, I'd wanted to be an
astronaut, but as a teenager, no way.

I don't remember much about the camp. We did a tour, saw mission
control. We looked through a window at the computer room. I saw my first
hard drive at NASA, it looked like and was the size of a washing
machine. I remember the engineers were dudes in short-sleeve collared
shirts who'd chain smoke and wore bad glasses.

I do remember learning to code on the Apple IIs. Only time I ever used
Apple anything until I got an iPhone 25 years later. It wasn't even a
real programming language, but this educational language called Logo
that drew pictures on a screen. I don't really remember them teaching us
much, but they must have. I don't remember if June was even part of the
programming class, but she was part of our day.

While we were in some lecture scenario, I remember June talking about
science fiction and ethics and the ***Laws of Robotics***. I never read
Asimov's robot novels, I'd gone straight to *Foundation*, since my Uncle
Clay had told me was the best Asimov. I might have mouthed off something
to that effect.

I remember meeting Colonel Scobee, it might have been on the last day of
camp. I hope I was respectful. I remember thinking, *he looks like
somebody's dad, not a badass pilot*.

He was.

Both.

The tragedy is what stands out in my memory, what happened after. It was
only half a year between the camp and the accident, but in a teenager's
timeline it felt like a decade.

There was a lot of expectation in the news and among Houston
schoolteachers about a teacher in space. We were freshmen boys, I'm sure
we mocked it. My youngest kid is that same age now. His disdain for
teachers matches mine at that age, for the same reason. People are
complex, and kids see things through their direct experience until
they've experienced more. Raising teenagers sure does change your
perspective on being a teenager.

I have no memory of knowing that Dick Scobee was commander of the
teacher-in-space mission ahead of the tragedy. I bet my mom told me and
I tuned it out. That January day, realizing what it meant after the
accident, was sickening. That memory became a stake in my identity. How
shallow we can really be.

I can't blame teenagers for their thoughts on teachers and authority.
Look how long it took me to realize the true value of this gift from
June Scobee.[^7]

Her gift was the greatest leverage in real terms anybody has ever given
me. I raised a family and provided for them with this gift. I was 51
years old when I realized it. I was 14 when I went to that summer camp.
37 years. I have made an entire life out of what June taught me I could
do in a free summer camp.

This is where the story diverges from what most teachers would want.

I had no interest in technology in high school. I read a lot and was
smart and could figure things out. I didn't like being forced to learn
what I thought was basic stuff. In retrospect, the skills I'd learned to
that point, going to elementary and middle schools in Cy-Fair ISD
prepared me very well for the life I've had. Long before the internet, I
had the capacity to figure out what I needed to know and the skills to
find the answers. I could read, I could write, and I could do math and
basic algebra, and that has served me well though my life.

After 11^th^ grade we found a loophole, and me and my friend dropped out
of High School, took the GED and enrolled at University of Houston.
Neither of us took to college any more than high school, but since we
weren't 18 yet, it was an acceptable compromise for our parents. The
next year, we both took off for Los Angeles. I pursued music and writing
for a few years, doing a variety of odd jobs to support myself.

I knew what a PC was but never used one. In fact, rather than buy a
computer, I spent a few hundred bucks on an integrated word-processor
with a printer. I had zero interest in technology or engineering, I was
writing about what I wanted to write about.

I had a bunch of food and retail jobs, delivery driver, bank teller,
liquor store, gas station attendant. In 1992 I was working for a redneck
in Waller delivering horse trailers, when my vagabond friend set me up
with an air-conditioned job repairing laptop computers. I ordered parts
and kept the operation moving along and learned how to put laptop
computers together. The secret, I learned, was that if you put a laptop
back together and have an even amount of screws leftover, you did
something wrong.

That company was somehow connected to Tony in New Jersey, and it went
under. My drummer's mom worked at Compaq Computer on the night shift
assembly line and used some insider voodoo to get me a temp job under
her general protection. We worked on a Printed Circuit Board (PCB)
manufacturing line, we made huge motherboards for servers. It was an
air-conditioned job, and I learned several roles rapidly, but none
needed computer skills. Late at night, you had to stay awake or risk
instant termination if you were spotted dozing by a supervisor. It was
very difficult as the line was often stalled for hours at a time due to
changeovers or supply chain issues. There was one lady who did stuff on
the computer. She'd open reports and print them, then collate them
manually and then print out another report, which she would give to the
boss. You couldn't read books on the assembly line even if there was
nothing to do. I quickly figured out the best thing to do was look busy
when there was nothing to do or somebody would make me do something I
didn't want to do.

Computers in those days came with a set of manuals, including a BASIC
programming manual. Extra books that came with new systems were always
around the line and were the one kind of reading material allowed on the
floor besides specifications, work orders and schematics. I found that I
could teach myself BASIC by figuring out how to collate all the files
and print them out and save the lady some time each night. It probably
took about a month.

Didn't go like I thought when I unveiled my innovation to the lady.
Turns out she liked staying late to turn in the reports so she could get
a half-hour overtime pay every day. Plus, complaining about staying late
to the young people gave her a way to stay awake all night. My drummer's
mom rescued me, but I was banished to another shift in a negotiated
truce.

After a couple years of this, I found my way into an engineering team. I
started doing tech stuff around the lab. I automated some stuff with
batch files. An opportunity came up for a programming assignment in C,
and my brother had a book about C, so I told them I was qualified. Turns
out, I was, thanks to June Scobee.

From that path on, my career through digital logic has been smooth
sailing. The basic skill I learned back in 1985 was all I needed. I call
that integrative thinking, the ability to break down problems into
smaller pieces, and solve the pieces. It's a common skill, used in all
industries, with or without code.

The more you do it, the better you get at it. The real power is your
ability to use code as a tool to apply even greater leverage. That's
just looking at real world problems the same way as you solve code
problems. It doesn't take four years of high school and multiple years
in university to learn those skills. It takes identification of natural
potential and a little directed on the job training. Generations raised
on digital logic are naturally more adaptive to integrative thinking
because that is how software works.

I remember I'd been programming in C++ for about two years when I
finally got some real training in a class we took at Compaq. My mentor,
who was a C programmer only, but light years beyond me in engineering
terms, was sitting next to me struggling with some examples in C++ which
was new to him. I remember him watching me do some trick on the command
line in Windows that was illegal in Unix and him pointing that out and I
felt so smug.

That memory is truth. How leveraged by the past we are. My bag of tricks
in programing was like a cheat code in a game to him. He'd had to solve
all these puzzles himself, through incredible hours of focused thought.
Every time I ran into a difficult programming problem -- even in 1998 --
all I had to do was write the problem clearly in English and type it
into a search engine and I'd find at least a hundred ways somebody had
solved the same problem.

Leverage is the prime component of any engineering task. Digital
leverage is the most powerful tool man has ever created. That is because
all engineering is digital engineering. Good engineers in every field
are the ones that use software as a tool. *Engineers are responsible for
the tools they use*. That's the most valuable engineering lesson. The
sooner engineers understand their basic toolset, the more effective
engineers they will be. All industries are potential innovation
frontiers for young people trained to use digital tools.

Coding isn't for everybody.

This ability is not the same as being good at math. The math we use in
integrative thinking is very simple.

I don't know how June Scobee identified that I was a good candidate to
learn how to code.

I suspect if you ran the same studies to identify kids who'd be good
engineers in the 1980's on kids from the 2020's, it would result in a
much broader candidate pool. How could it not? We give very young
children digital devices to play games with, sometimes before they can
walk or talk.

It could be some kids are good at games because they have an innate
talent, like some kids can learn to juggle. I doubt it. Video games are
designed by people who like to play games, so there's a level of insight
you can gain from that.

There are some kids who will always beat a game, given enough time. You
can study those kids, and by studying the choices they make, figure out
the deductive logic they are using.

Some will follow logical deductive paths. Essentially, they reverse
engineer the algorithms the game designers used.

Others might just use a monkey-with darts and make a map of what works,
either mentally or by recording results.

Both approaches are good strategies to find a solution, and both are
demonstrations of integrative ability. The map strategy requires many
more iterations. In digital engineering that is natural leverage --
something computers can do very quickly. It's easy to design experiments
to iterate through a set of possibilities, that's the leverage of
Moore's Law.

Digital games usually make you go through a lot of work to keep
experimenting with a map strategy, so kids with this ability may tend to
give up more easily than those who use a more deductive path.

Other kids might just be lucky. Some will have extra-leverage -- they
used a cheat code. That's super integrative leverage -- exactly what I
do when I Google a solution.

This approach is a fair way to study and find kids that could be
productive engineers.

You find these kids, wherever they are, teach them to code in a summer
camp, and they will have a valuable and marketable skill that they can
use directly in almost any endeavor they choose. More directly, you make
sure these kids have opportunity to develop that skill in direct and
equitable ways.

In Academic settings most kid's prime motivation is to get it over with.
Applied learning is often driven by the desire to increase earnings, a
real motivator. Having a chance at a high paid profession is a
motivation that leverages all parties involved. Dedication is required,
but knowing you have the basic skills is all it takes to get started.

Learning to code directly changed my life. Thanks, Mom, for banishing me
to the free NASA nerd camp.

I remember Dick Scobee as just an ordinary guy with an extraordinarily
cool job.

June Scobee didn't come across as ordinary. The correct Texas term for
June is "sparkplug." She wasn't an ordinary mom and schoolteacher. She
was like a live action version of a Jetson's supermom, whose kid would
be expected to grow up become a general in the Space Cadets. She
expected something of her students.

Thank you, June Scobee Rodgers.

I wonder what the success rate of those kids June taught that summer?

After the accident, June and the families of the crew founded Challenger
Center. Challenger Center's mission is a natural extension of STS-51-L's
mission -- The Teacher in Space Project.[^8] Challenger Center inspires
and educates students in STEM through hands-on lessons that simulate
space missions. In the 35 years since Challenger Center opened, they've
taught millions of students and enabled hundreds of thousands of
teachers.

What's the value of June's contribution to our civilization? It's very
valuable, but immeasurable with property. You can't put a dollar value
on dreams. They have intrinsic value.

If you read *Silver Linings*, June's book, you know she had to fight
just to study what she was interested in. She gets her revenge by
forcing the next generation -- me -- to learn something I was good at
but had absolutely zero interest in. How ironic. And recursive. And
Texan. And wonderful.

Genius.

That's the mission for Scoot(23). To give every child on the planet the
same opportunity that June gave me. To learn to code for free.

I don't know how I'm going to do it.

I know who I'm going to ask for help.

Thank you, June.

***Ad astra!Â ***

*The Foundation is Gratitude*

STEVE FAIRCHILD

Scoot(25)
=========

I recently had the experience of going full circle in my career, going
back to a similar role to where I started. In engineering, it is an
enlightening experience -- though I imagine that would be true in any
career. One of the first things you learn is you weren't nearly as smart
as you thought you were way back when.

I was lucky to start my engineering career at Compaq in Houston in the
1990s. In those days, Compaq had a mix of electronics industry veterans
and hard charging young engineers, and though I had little experience, I
was able to fit in well.

The engineer who most influenced my career was Steve Fairchild. As
somebody who was on the front lines of a rather competitive battlefield,
it is my opinion that Steve was the person most responsible for the
success of both SAS and SFF HDDs.

Back in those days, I didn't think so fondly of Steve. He was big, loud
and could be intimidating. My relationship with Steve was all business,
I never got to know him outside of work, but I imagine in real life he
was giant teddy bear. While he was unmerciful in his engineering
criticism, it was all about the engineering, never personal or
vindictive. I have watched Steve cut down both vendors and peers in
exactly the fewest words possible and without any room for rebuttable.
You did not act like you knew what you were talking about around Steve
unless you knew what you were talking about.

Our team was responsible for qualification of SCSI HDDs, and my role was
programming the Big-Real Mode DOS utility we used for testing, Psuite.
Sometime around 1998, I ported Psuite from Compaq's internal SCSI driver
library to Adaptec's CHIM library. In a rush to get their chip into
production, I had been required to spend weeks in California helping
Adaptec debug their chip with my software. It wasn't a lot of fun for me
or for Adaptec, as it consisted mostly of me waiting on them to deliver
some code to test and debug.

We had a plan to port Psuite to some modern 32-bit OS, and my idea was
for Windows. My key selling point was vendors had to have Windows SCSI
drivers, so we wouldn't need to do any babysitting, we could just give
them the Windows Psuite application and they could debug their own
drivers without my direct help. My own motivation was: there wasn't much
career potential programming on DOS and the other alternatives were too
specialized, but there was plenty of work programming on Windows. Linux
was too immature and had even bigger technical challenges to overcome
than Windows.

I never had the nerve to ask Steve or anybody else what Steve's actual
job was, he was a member of the technical staff and knew everything. His
role on our team was performance. His role for our software development
team was to greenlight the performance of our software.

My approach is always code first, research later. In the early days of
our discussion, I had already ported a basic version of Psuite and
proven that the performance would be within 1% of our DOS tool. These
were spinning HDDs, and even though we were testing the fastest
available on the market, they were terribly slow compared to most other
subsystems on a server, and I had the general attitude that performance
methodology was not a big deal. My biggest challenge was on the
functional side, where we did not have the same visibility to SCSI
protocol compliance that we did with our DOS built-in driver. I had the
support of my manager for the relative performance, with the caveat,
"*As long as Steve is okay with it."*

Steve wasn't okay with it. After presenting my 1% data, Steve tore my
plan apart, coming up with a list of around ten performance items that I
would have to address. I seem to recall that at least half of the list
were things that weren't even measurable with our DOS tools, so not only
did I have to code these new measurement techniques on Windows, with its
rich libraries I could leverage, but then go figure out how to back-port
the same techniques to DOS so that I could prove to Steve there was no
difference.

This went on for months. We'd have these weekly meetings, where I'd want
to talk about all the really clever coding I done to move forward on the
functional side, and Steve would tell me I'm wasting my time until I'd
finished the methodology tasks he'd created for me. It bugged me,
because 90% of the problems we worked on were functional error recovery
problems, and Psuite was clearly the best tool in the industry for that.
Hard Drives are and were always slow, and it did not matter what
software tool you used to measure them, they'd still be slow.

I remember after one particularly brutal meeting, I'd gone back to my
office to reconsider what Steve had said about my data, and thought I'd
caught him in a mistake. I took my printout to his office, and within
about 30 seconds, he'd completely turned me around. Not only did I
misinterpret my own data, I hadn't even been asking the right questions.
Before I could escape, Steve had me sit down, where he proceeded to draw
a diagram on paper and lecture me for an hour, when all I wanted to do
was go back to my office and cry. I know the subject was system level
performance, and I know what Steve was trying to convey was that
methodology was the most important part of measurement; the numbers
themselves didn't matter. I think he was trying to make me feel better
about doing all this work that had absolutely no relevance to the
current technology but might one day help him with whatever he was
working on. I didn't feel better about it. Boy, do I wish I'd paid
attention, would have saved me a lot of trouble down the road.

When I completed the last item on Steve's list, and I presented the data
to Steve in our team meeting. He said, *"What are you going to do about
aborts*?" No, "*Good job, man*." or "Y*ou were right all along, I should
have never doubted you*," but what are you going to do now about the
real problem I was keeping you from working on all along? By this point,
I'd had to complete so much code to validate Steve's requests, the
project was pretty much done, except for the hardest part. Steve was no
help for me there. Apparently, he'd taught himself the Windows Storage
Stack fast-path by having a young engineer do a bunch of seemingly
useless experiments for him. He had no idea how the error path worked --
that was for mortal engineers.

I left Compaq not long after finishing that project to work for Adaptec.
During the early days of SAS, I worked very closely with Steve as a
customer and he treated me with respect and continued to mentor me,
especially when it came to how to deal with my own bosses. After I made
a particularly embarrassing and potentially career ending mistake, Steve
was gracious and gave me the single best piece of career advice anybody
ever gave me. I'll keep that gem to myself for now, but one thing Steve
knew was that in computer business, the engineers and not management or
marketing held the real power. For Steve, it was more than just an
obligation to point out engineering weaknesses and come up with clever
solutions. I believe he felt responsible for making well engineered
products, and he knew with the right methodology and data, he could
always hold marketing and management to account.

Sadly, Steve was a mortal engineer. I don't remember the dates, but it
seems like he got sick right around the time HP shipped SAS. I didn't
see much of Steve after that, we went out to lunch a few times a year.
In the beginning, Steve initiated these lunches. Steve always paid for
his own lunch, long before it was HP policy not to accept paid meals
from vendors. Somewhere along the way, I got the reputation as one of
the few engineers Steve would go out to lunch with, so every few months
marketing or sales of whatever company I was working for would get the
idea that we could make an inside run at some kind of influence or get
some information from Steve. I didn't bother with subterfuge with Steve,
he would have seen right through it, I would just come right out and
tell him what my people were after, and he'd usually say something like,
*"I'm not going to tell you that.*" Then we'd have a nice lunch and talk
about engineering.

In 2010 I took a job in China. We corresponded a few times via email,
Steve was very curious about both life and engineering in China. I came
back to the states at the end of 2012, but only saw Steve once, walking
very slowly down the hallways of HP. He looked exhausted but took the
time to remind me that we needed to catch up and tell him all about
China. This never happened. Steve died in 2013.

I've had a very successful career, and for the most part, I've been able
to do the kind of engineering I think Steve would be proud of. I never
got to tell him what he meant to me when he was alive, but as I've grown
older I think about him more and more. Every time I smell some weak
engineering from marketing, or management, or other engineers, I ask
myself, "*What would Steve say*?"

Steve engrained in me the notion that engineers are responsible for the
tools they use. And Steve said to me, "*The methodology is the most
important thing*." The industry lost a legendary engineer when we lost
Steve. He was the best engineer I've ever worked with.

This work is dedicated to Steve Fairchild.

![A picture containing person, outdoor, tree Description automatically
generated](./images/media/image5.jpg){width="2.1666666666666665in"
height="2.3958333333333335in"}

Steve Fairchild

*The Foundation is Gratitude*

[^1]: Texas scientists have identified this as the prehistoric
    Bankman-Fried eel.

[^2]: Yes, rap music was also invented by prehistoric Texans, though it
    is unknown where exactly on the ocean this scene takes place. It
    does explain her-highest-highness's choice in consort.

[^3]: This happened just north of the Rio Grande so another feminist
    innovation invented in Texas.

[^4]: Children, this proves that Texas Historians also know the literal
    use of "literally."

[^5]: A redemption story.

[^6]: Taken from *Silver Linings*, by June Scobee Rodgers

[^7]: A reliable Texan source has confirmed that the camp was created by
    June Scobee and sponsored by Texas A&M. Karma at work, a lifetime of
    Aggie jokes has finally caught up with me.

[^8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teacher\_in\_Space\_Project
